Taking Nuclear Site, Russia Marches On
KYIV, Ukraine - Russian forces in Ukraine seized Europe's biggest nuclear power plant on Friday, tightened their noose around the capital and threatened more southern cities in their march to control the Black Sea coast, intensifying the deadly destruction and chaos from the eight-day-old invasion.
The Russian military advance, punctuated by a firefight with Ukrainian forces at the nuclear plant and shelling of other areas, came as the Kremlin strengthened its own crackdown at home on how the invasion was reported, including enacting stiff prison penalties for criticism, a ban on Facebook and other social media restrictions. At least four major Western news outlets suspended operations in Russia.
The developments all pointed to a worsening crisis for Europe and the world as President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia showed no inclination to soften his goal of taking control of Ukraine, the former Soviet republic of 44 million that is now at the center of an intense new Cold War between Russia and the West.
As Russian troops moved deeper into the Ukrainian heartland, the number of civilians headed toward the western border to escape the onslaught increased sharply. In the western city of Lviv, the train station was swamped with desperate civilians seeking refuge from the Russian assault.
"We had 30,000 people arrive last night," a lawmaker, Viktoria Khrystenko, said at the station. "Tonight, we will have 100,000."
The rising flight of civilians came as Ukraine said Russian forces were now occupying the Zaporizhzhia nuclear facility after an early-morning battle and fire there had raised worldwide alarms. It said that all of the site's power units remained intact and that no changes in radiation levels had been observed.
Russia and Ukraine accused each other of having recklessly damaged the nuclear site in southern Ukraine in a fight for control, and the precise cause of the fire was unclear. But the mere possibility of a radiation leak in Ukraine, home to the world's worst nuclear accident in Chernobyl 36 years ago, invited new global rebukes aimed at Russia.
"By the grace of God, the world narrowly averted a nuclear catastrophe last night," Linda Thomas-Greenfield, the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, told the U.N. Security Council at an emergency session that was convened to discuss the new hazards raised by Russia's armed takeover of Zaporizhzhia.
Mr. Putin "must stop this madness, and stop it now," she said.
Britain's ambassador, Barbara Woodward, said the firefight was "the first time a state has attacked a fueled and functioning nuclear power plant."
Russia's ambassador, Vasily A. Nebenzya, denied that the country's military had targeted the plant, and he accused Ukraine and its Western allies of having incited "artificial hysteria."
Mr. Nebenzya maintained that Russian forces patrolling outside of the nuclear plant had come under fire from Ukrainian militants inside a training building and had returned fire. He said the Ukrainians then set the building ablaze. Ukraine's U.N. ambassador, Sergiy Kyslytsya, accusing Mr. Nebenzya of lies, said Russian shelling had started the fire, calling it "nuclear terrorism."
The director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency, Rafael M. Grossi, who is pushing for access to Ukraine's occupied nuclear facilities, said that, "from a technical point of view," the Zaporizhzhia plant was operating "normally" after the fire.
But he added, "As I have stressed to the board of governors of I.A.E.A., there is no normalcy to the situation when there are military forces in charge of the site."
At a meeting of NATO foreign minsters in Brussels, the alliance's secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said that Russia had used anti-personnel cluster bombs and that he had seen reports of "other types of weapons which would be in violation of international law."
But Mr. Stoltenberg rejected calls by President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine to impose a no-fly zone over Ukraine, warning that it could draw the alliance, which does not include Ukraine, into a wider war with Russia.
That rejection, while expected, nonetheless drew a bitter rejoinder from Mr. Zelensky in Kyiv. "Today the alliance's leadership gave a green light to the further bombardment of Ukrainian towns and villages," he said.
In Kyiv, thousands of residents, mostly women and children, packed the central train station to leave, driven by growing fears that Russian forces were closing in. Several large explosions shook the capital.
An estimated 331 civilians had been killed in Ukraine as of midnight on Thursday, up from 227 a day earlier, according to the United Nations.
Intensifying an effort to control how the conflict is reported in Russia, the Kremlin stepped up its domestic crackdown on free speech to the strictest levels since Mr. Putin's rise to power more than two decades ago.
The Russian government blocked access to Facebook inside the country, accusing the company of "discrimination against Russian news media" by limiting access to pro-Kremlin accounts, including the Defense Ministry's television channel.
Facebook has no employees in Russia and it is not hugely popular with the general public. But it has been a place where Russians could express criticism of the government and find information outside of state-run media outlets.
"Soon, millions of ordinary Russians will find themselves cut off from reliable information, deprived of their everyday ways of connecting with family and friends and silenced from speaking out," Nick Clegg, the president of global affairs at Meta, Facebook's parent company, said in a statement.
Mr. Putin also signed a law punishing the spreading of "false information" about Russia's armed forces with as much as 15 years in prison.
The law could take effect as soon as Saturday, and make it a crime to simply call the war a "war" - the Kremlin says it is a "special military operation" - on social media or in a news article or broadcast.
The threat of the law already forced an independent Russian TV station and a freewheeling radio station founded by Soviet dissidents to collapse on Thursday. On Friday, Russia's last major independent newspaper, Novaya Gazeta, said on Twitter that it was deleting its war content.
The BBC, CNN, Bloomberg and the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation all said on Friday that they were temporarily suspending the work of their journalists and support staff in Russia because of the threat and uncertainties that the law posed. And Cogent Communications, a major U.S. internet service provider, said it was severing relationships in Russia over concerns "about the use of our infrastructure for cyberwarfare and dissemination of false information."
As the invasion ground into its second week, the Ukrainian military said it believed that the Russian Navy was preparing for an amphibious attack as part of a plan to move on Odessa, a vital southern port city.
In a vivid sign of how fraught the situation had become, the Ukrainian Navy purposely sank the flagship of its own Black Sea fleet on Thursday to prevent the warship from being seized in a Russian military assault.
Russian forces, which seized the southern port of Kherson on Wednesday, were also bearing down on Mykolaiv, about 45 miles northwest, in an apparent bid to take control of the entire Black Sea coast and cut the country off from international shipping.
The streets of Mykolaiv were largely empty on Friday, save for Ukrainian troops and a few elderly residents with shopping bags. The boom of Ukrainian artillery sounded, and the one bridge out of the city in the direction of Odessa was rigged to explode should Russian forces approach it.
Guards positioned there were armed with anti-tank missiles provided by the British government.
"We are ready to fight to the last bullet," said the city's mayor, Oleksandr Senkevich, standing in his office with a pistol in his pocket.
Chancellor Olaf Scholz of Germany spoke to Mr. Putin for an hour by phone on Friday, asking him to immediately cease hostilities and to allow humanitarian aid into areas where the fighting continued, the chancellor's office said.
Mr. Putin said there would be a third round of talks with Ukrainian officials. The first two yielded an agreement to allow civilians to evacuate along "humanitarian corridors," but no signs of progress on a pact to halt the fighting.
As the United States and Europe have introduced heavy sanctions on Russia, crippling its economy, and as arts and business ventures have moved swiftly to cut ties with Moscow, the country also faced ostracism by the sports world.
At the opening ceremony of the Winter Paralympics in Beijing, the president of the International Paralympic Committee, Andrew Parsons, denounced the Russian invasion, saying he was "horrified" by it and wanted to send a "a message of peace."
Mr. Parson's speech - which President Xi Jinping of China attended - was notable partly because Mr. Xi is close with Mr. Putin and because it was a frank rebuke by the leader of a sports organization that traditionally stresses unity and comity.
Chinese social media users said that the state-run broadcaster CCTV had censored part of the speech, stopping the Chinese translation for about one minute after Mr. Parsons said, "At the I.P.C., we aspire to a better and more inclusive world, free from discrimination, free from hate, free from ignorance and free from conflict."
