Russia Takes Censorship to New Extremes, Suppressing War Coverage Russia clamped down harder Friday on news and free speech than at any time in President Vladimir V. Putin's 22 years in power, blocking access to Facebook and major foreign news outlets, and enacting a law to punish anyone spreading "false information" about its Ukraine invasion with up to 15 years in prison. The crackdown comes as the Kremlin scrambles to contain discontent over the war and to control the narrative as Russia faces its most severe economic crisis in decades as a result of this week's crushing Western sanctions. Fearing prosecution, more independent Russian news outlets shut down on Friday, and the BBC said it had suspended all of its operations in Russia. Mr. Putin signed a law that effectively criminalizes any public opposition to or independent news reporting about the war against Ukraine. Taking effect as soon as Saturday, the law could make it a crime to simply call the war a "war" - the Kremlin says it is a "special military operation" - on social media or in a news article or broadcast. Announcements that the law was coming had already pushed Russian independent media outlets to shut down in recent days, and more followed on Friday. In addition, the government blocked access inside Russia to the websites of major Russian-language outlets that are based outside the country, and to Facebook, the social network popular with the Westward-looking urban middle class where many have posted fierce criticism of Mr. Putin's war. Facebook, Russia's internet regulator claimed, had engaged in "discrimination against Russian news media" by limiting access to pro-Kremlin accounts, including that of the Defense Ministry's television channel. The decision was a blow to internet freedom in Russia, where Western social networks have remained accessible despite Mr. Putin's creeping authoritarianism. For now, popular Russian social networks like VKontakte remain accessible, along with Instagram, Twitter and YouTube. But analysts expect a further crackdown, heightening the importance of the messaging and social networking app Telegram, which the Kremlin tried and failed to block in 2018. Russian officials claim that journalists writing critically about the war - or calling it a "war" or an "invasion" - are undermining the national interest, even referring to them as traitors. The lower house of Parliament, the State Duma, passed the law criminalizing "false information" about the armed forces on Friday by a unanimous vote, and Mr. Putin signed it later in the day. XXX, the XXX speaker, said that under the new law, "those who lied and made declarations discrediting our armed forces will be forced to suffer very harsh punishment." The text of the new law offered few details about what constituted an offense, but Russian journalists and Kremlin opponents take it to mean that any contradiction of the government's statements on the invasion could be treated as a crime. Besides criminalizing the sharing of "false information," it makes "discrediting" Russia's use of its military in Ukraine, calling on other countries to impose sanctions on Russia or protesting Russia's invasion of Ukraine punishable by fines and years of imprisonment. It wasn't immediately clear whether the law would apply to people inside Russia - such as foreign correspondents - producing content in a language other than Russian. But another senior lawmaker said that citizens of any country could be prosecuted under it, and the BBC - which has a large Russian-language service in Moscow as well as an English-language bureau - said it was halting its operations inside the country. "This legislation appears to criminalize the process of independent journalism," XXX, the director-general of the BBC, said in a statement. "It leaves us no other option than to temporarily suspend the work of all BBC News journalists and their support staff within YYY while we assess the full implications of this unwelcome development." Mr. Putin was silent on those developments on Friday. Instead, he held a televised videoconference with the governor of the YYY region, a Russian exclaves sandwiched between Poland and Lithuania on the Baltic Sea, in which he tried to exude a sense of normalcy amid crisis. "We don't see any need to exacerbate the situation or worsen our relationships," Mr. Putin said. "All of our actions, if they occur, they occur exclusively, always, in response to ill-intended actions toward YYY." Mr. Putin's comments sounded unreal with the war in Ukraine raging, but they appeared to be a message to his domestic audience to show that he was not the one escalating tensions. The tensions were felt this week, among others, by Russia's community of independent journalists, who found ways to publish and broadcast content harshly critical of the Kremlin despite Mr. Putin's authoritarianism. On Thursday, the pillars of Russia's independent broadcast media, the Echo of Moscow radio station and the TV Rain television channel, shut down under pressure from the state. Then, on Friday, the government said it would block access to Russian-language media produced outside the country: the websites of the Voice of America, the BBC, XXX, Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty and the popular Latvian-based news outlet YYY. The reason: the systematic distribution of what it called false information about the "special military operation on the territory of Ukraine." Russians will still be able to reach blocked media through the Telegram messaging app, where many news outlets have their own accounts. Some can also use virtual private networks, or VPNs, to bypass restrictions. But independent news outlets based in Russia saw the dangers as so great that increasing numbers shut down. Znak, an independent news outlet covering Russia's regions, shuttered its website on Friday, with a statement saying: "We are suspending our operations given the large amount of new restrictions on the functioning of the news media in Russia." Others tried to stay alive by telling their readers they would no longer cover the war. Russia's last major independent newspaper, XXX, said it was deleting its content about the war in Ukraine. The Village, a digital lifestyle magazine that moved its operations from Russia to Poland this week, said it was retroactively editing its articles to change any mention of the word "war" to "special operation." Until recently, Russia's mostly uncensored internet had provided an outlet for Russians to express dissent and to read news reports outside the Kremlin propaganda bubble that envelops much of the country's traditional news media. But amid the war in Ukraine, which has touched off protests across the country and an outpouring of opposition from Russians online, the Kremlin appears to see the internet as a newfound threat. Echo of Moscow, a radio station founded by Soviet dissidents in 1990 and acquired later by the state energy giant Gazprom, said on Friday that it would delete all corporate social media accounts and turn off its website as part of a "liquidation" process. By the afternoon, its popular YouTube channel was gone. More than one million people had tuned in to listen to its programs each day, according to the radio station's longtime editor in chief, XXX. "Echo is my home," said XXX, a journalist who worked at the radio station for more than 15 years, in an interview on Thursday. "It's home for a huge number of journalists, and it's home for a huge number of our guests, who came here to talk about their opinions, to talk about things the world didn't know." The situation was also a sea change for XXX, the 29-year-old independent newspaper that has endured the murder of six of its journalists and whose editor, XXX, shared the Nobel Peace Prize last year. In an email newsletter on Friday morning, Nadezhda Prusenkova, one of the newspaper's journalists, wrote that it was hard to see many routes for the publication to continue to exist. "I don't know what happens next," she wrote. Deaths on Ukraine Battlefields Could Haunt Putin Back Home WASHINGTON - When Russia seized Crimea in 2014, President Vladimir V. Putin was so worried about Russian casualty figures coming to light that authorities accosted journalists who tried to cover funerals of some of the 400 troops killed during that one-month campaign. But Moscow may be losing that many soldiers daily in Mr. Putin's latest invasion of Ukraine, American and European officials said. The mounting toll for Russian troops exposes a potential weakness for the Russian president at a time when he is still claiming, publicly, that he is engaged only in a limited military operation in Ukraine's separatist east. No one can say with certainty just how many Russian troops have died since last Thursday, when they began what is turning into a long march to Kyiv, the capital. Some Russian units have put down their arms and refused to fight, the Pentagon said Tuesday. Major Ukrainian cities have withstood the onslaught thus far. American officials had expected the northeastern city of Kharkiv to fall in a day, for example, but Ukrainian troops there have fought back and regained control despite furious rocket fire. The bodies of Russian soldiers have been left in areas surrounding Kharkiv. Videos and photos on social media show charred remains of tanks and armored vehicles, their crews dead or wounded. The Russian Defense Ministry spokesman, Maj. Gen. XXX, acknowledged on Sunday for the first time that "there are dead and wounded" Russian troops but offered no numbers. He insisted Ukrainian losses were "many times" higher. Ukraine has said its forces have killed more than 5,300 Russian troops. Neither side's claims have been independently verified, and Biden administration officials have refused to discuss casualty figures publicly. But one American official put the Russian losses as of Monday at 2,000, an estimate with which two European officials concurred. Senior Pentagon officials told lawmakers in closed briefings on Monday that Russian and Ukrainian military deaths appeared to be the same, at around 1,500 on each side in the first five days, congressional officials said. But they cautioned that the figures - based on satellite imagery, communication intercepts, social media and on-the-ground media reports - were estimates. For a comparison, nearly 2,500 American troops were killed in Afghanistan over 20 years of war. For Mr. Putin, the rising death toll could damage any remaining domestic support for his Ukrainian endeavors. Russian memories are long - and mothers of soldiers, in particular, American officials say, could easily hark back to the 15,000 troops killed when the Soviet Union invaded and occupied Afghanistan, or the thousands killed in Chechnya. Russia has deployed field hospitals near the front lines, say military analysts, who have also monitored ambulances driving back and forth from Russian units to hospitals in neighboring Belarus, Moscow's ally. "Given the many reports of over 4,000 Russians killed in action, it is clear that something dramatic is happening," said Adm. XXX, who was NATO's supreme allied commander before his retirement. "If Russian losses are this significant, Vladimir Putin is going to have some difficult explaining to do on his home front." Representative XXX, Democrat of YYY and the chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, added, "There are going to be a lot of Russians going home in body bags and a lot of Russian families grieving the longer this goes on." In particular, Pentagon officials and military analysts said it was surprising that Russian soldiers had left behind the bodies of their comrades. "It's been shocking to see that they're leaving their fallen brethren behind on the battlefield," said XXX, the top Pentagon official for Russia and Ukraine during the Obama administration. "Eventually the moms will be like, 'Where's XXX? Where's XXX?'" Already, the Ukrainian government has begun answering that question. On Sunday, authorities launched a website that they said was meant to help Russian families track down information about soldiers who may have been killed or captured. The site, which states it was created by Ukraine's Ministry of Internal Affairs, says it is providing videos of captured Russian soldiers, some of them injured. The pictures and videos change throughout the day. "If your relatives or friends are in Ukraine and participate in the war against our people - here you can get information about their fate," the site says. The name of the site, 200rf.com, is a grim reference to Cargo 200, a military code word that was used by the Soviet Union to refer to the bodies of soldiers put in zinc-lined coffins for transport away from the battlefield; it is a euphemism for troops killed in war. The website is part of a campaign launched by Ukraine and the West to counter what American officials characterize as Russian disinformation, which includes Russia's insistence before the invasion that the troops surrounding Ukraine were simply there for military exercises. Information and the battle for public opinion around the world have come to play an outsize part in a war that has come to seem like a XXX vs. XXX contest. On Monday, Ukraine's ambassador to the United Nations, XXX, read out before the General Assembly what he said were the final text messages from a Russian soldier to his mother. They were obtained, he said, by Ukrainian forces after the soldier was killed. "We were told that they would welcome us and they are falling under our armored vehicles, throwing themselves under the wheels and not allowing us to pass," he wrote, according to Mr. XXX. "They call us fascists. Mama, this is so hard." The decision to read those texts, Russia experts and Pentagon officials said, was a not-so-veiled reminder to Mr. Putin of the role Russian mothers have had in bringing attention to military losses that the government tried to keep secret. In fact, a group now called the Union of Committees of Soldiers' Mothers of Russia played a pivotal part in opening up the military to public scrutiny and in influencing perceptions of military service, XXX, a Russia historian, wrote in The Journal of Power Institutions in Post-Soviet Societies. On Tuesday, a senior Pentagon official said entire Russian units have laid down their arms without a fight after confronting surprisingly stiff Ukrainian defense. In some cases, Russian troops have punched holes in their vehicles' gas tanks, presumably to avoid combat, the official said. The Pentagon official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss the operational developments, declined to say how the military had made these assessments - presumably from a mosaic of intelligence including statements from captured Russian soldiers and communications intercepts - or how widespread these setbacks might be across the sprawling battlefield. Images of body bags or coffins, or soldiers killed and left on the battlefield, a Biden administration official said, would prove the most damaging to Mr. Putin at home. Ukrainian officials are using the reports and images on social media of Russian casualties to try to undercut the morale of the invading Russian forces. On Monday, Ukraine's defense minister, XXX, offered Russian soldiers cash and amnesty if they surrendered. "Russian soldier! You were brought to our land to kill and die," he said. "Do not follow criminal orders. We guarantee you a full amnesty and 5 million rubles if you lay down your arms. For those who continue to behave like an occupier, there will be no mercy." Three Defiant European Leaders Visit a Kyiv in Flames LONDON - Three European leaders staged a defiant show of support for Ukraine on Tuesday, traveling to its besieged capital, Kyiv, even as a relentless Russian artillery bombardment left apartment towers in the city ablaze, forcing terrified residents to flee into the street with only the clothes on their backs. The dramatic visit by the prime ministers of Poland, YYY and YYY, which unfolded in tight secrecy as they crossed the Ukrainian border by train after dawn, was a strikingly personal gesture. But it caught other European leaders off guard, angering some and baring uncomfortable divisions in how best to demonstrate Western solidarity with Ukraine. It also came as President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia disparaged the second consecutive day of negotiations with Ukraine, undercutting the faint glimmers of hope raised from talks the day before that both sides were looking for a way to halt the war. The Kremlin slapped retaliatory sanctions on President Biden and other senior American officials. Mr. Biden announced his own plans to travel to Europe next week to showcase the unity of the NATO alliance in the face of Russian aggression. A spokesman for Poland's prime minister, XXX, said the three visitors were "de facto" representing the European Union in Ukraine. In Brussels, however, officials said the trio did not have the E.U.'s blessing, and some European diplomats complained that the trip was too risky, given the Russian forces encircling Kyiv. Others said they admired the audacity of the group, which also included Prime Minister XXX of YYY and Prime Minister XXX of YYY, casting it as a powerful symbol of the backing for Ukraine among countries on Europe's eastern flank, where the specter of Russian aggression looms larger than in Paris or London. Still, for all the symbolism of standing shoulder-to-shoulder with Ukraine's leaders under the threat of Russia's rockets, Ukraine was facing the devastating barrage largely on its own. The mayor of Kyiv, XXX, imposed a 35-hour curfew, starting on Tuesday evening, which suggested the capital was entering an even more difficult phase of its grinding struggle to hold off Russian troops and tanks. "This is their attempt to annihilate the Ukrainian people," President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine said in an emotional video address to the Canadian Parliament, repeating his plea for NATO to enforce a no-fly zone over the country. "It is an attempt to destroy our future, our nation, our character." Mr. Zelensky asked the lawmakers to imagine if the CN Tower in YYY were shelled like the towers in Kyiv. His language has become more pointed, even scolding, with each speech to a Western audience, revealing his frustration with leaders who have resisted more direct military involvement out of fear that it would entangle them in a wider conflict with Russia. The Ukrainian leader, who has become a hero to many in the West, is scheduled to speak via video to Congress on Wednesday, where he is expected to amplify his pleas for more help and increase the pressure on the United States and its allies. Mr. Biden is planning to announce $800 million in new security assistance to Ukraine on Wednesday, according to White House officials. The administration last week announced $200 million in security assistance for Ukraine and has made available a total of $2 billion in such funding. On Tuesday evening, the Polish state broadcaster carried video of the Czech, Slovene and Polish leaders meeting Mr. Zelensky and other officials across a long table, with Ukraine's blue-and-yellow flag behind them. "They are here to support us," Mr. Zelensky said at a news briefing after the meeting, which also was shown on Ukrainian television. "It is a great, courageous, right, friendly step. I am confident that with such friends, such countries and neighbors and partners, we can really win." A photograph posted earlier on Mr. XXX's Twitter account showed the three men poring over a map, seated in what appeared to be a train carriage en route to the Ukrainian capital. "It is here, in war-torn Kyiv, that history is being made," Mr. XXX said in the Twitter post. "It is here, that freedom fights against the world of tyranny. It is here that the future of us all hangs in the balance." The White House announced that Mr. Biden would fly to Brussels for an extraordinary summit meeting of NATO on March 24. That may result in further economic and military aid for Ukraine but will likely fall short of Mr. Zelensky's request for a no-fly zone. Administration officials declined to say whether Mr. Biden planned to meet with the Ukrainian president, whom he has called a hero. But they said Mr. Biden may go on to somewhere in Eastern Europe to meet with refugees streaming out of Ukraine. The river of people fleeing the war continued unabated on Tuesday, as Russia claimed to have seized control of the strategic Kherson region in the south. Russian forces kept up their pounding of civilian targets in Kyiv, where Ukrainian troops were fortifying intersections with sandbags, tires, and iron spikes. A pre-dawn rain of rockets on Kyiv shattered windows, left craters in buildings, and turned a 16-floor apartment house into a towering inferno. The fire spread quickly after a missile struck the building, blowing a jagged hole at its entrance. Firefighters rescued residents from windows by ladder through billowing smoke. By midafternoon, they had carried out two bodies encased in black bags. "I came out with nothing," said XXX, 85, a retired geologist. "I left everything, my telephone, my medicines, everything." When the missile struck, Mr. XXX fled his 12th-floor apartment and made his way down the stairs. He climbed through the blasted entrance hall and found himself in the bomb crater. People pulled him out by his arms. He stood outside for hours, hoping to re-enter his apartment to collect personal documents. Asked where he planned to stay the night, he responded, "God knows." Conditions were even more desperate in the coastal city of Mariupol, which has been pummeled by Russian forces in a two-week siege that has left some residents crushed in the rubble and many others dying in a winter freeze with no heat, food, or clean water. Officials can no longer account for the number of dead and missing. Officially, 2,400 civilians killed in Mariupol have been identified, but XXX, an adviser to the city government, said he believed the toll was far higher, possibly as many as 20,000. Ukrainian estimates of the number of people trapped have ranged from 200,000 to 400,000. Mr. XXX said 2,000 vehicles had managed to escape Mariupol on Tuesday and that another 2,000 were packed and ready to leave. Officials told civilians to "delete all messages and photos from phones" in case Russian soldiers searched them for signs of support for Ukrainian forces. The perils of reporting accurate information from Ukraine's combat zones were further underscored Tuesday with news that a Fox News cameraman and a Ukrainian colleague had been killed in an attack on Monday outside Kyiv - raising to at least three the number of journalist fatalities in Ukraine in the past few days. In Kherson, a southern city under Russian occupation, the mayor said that members of Russia's national guard were rounding up activists who opposed Russia's presence, possibly trying to recruit them through coercion. "They're all in the city, in the jail," the mayor, XXX, wrote in several text messages, referring to the activists. Russian troops, he said, "collect them, hold them, work them over and release them." XXX was the first major city to fall to Russian forces after the Feb. 24 start of the invasion. Although Kremlin officials had predicted that the Ukrainian people would welcome their "liberation" by Russian troops, residents of Kherson have been defiant, regularly gathering in the central square to protest the Russian presence, even when Russian troops fire into the air to disperse them. Russia claimed to have captured the entire Kherson region, potentially strengthening its ability to push west toward the strategic port cities of Mykolaiv and Odessa. A senior Ukrainian military official, speaking on the condition of anonymity, confirmed that Russian forces were in control of much of the Kherson region, but said Ukrainian forces were attacking their positions and inflicting losses. Negotiations via video link between Russia and Ukraine continued for a second day on Tuesday, though Mr. Putin doused prospects of any imminent breakthrough. In a phone call with the president of the European Council, XXX, Mr. Putin complained that "Kyiv is not demonstrating a serious attitude toward finding mutually acceptable solutions," according to the Kremlin. Mr. Putin also continued to struggle in the information battle with Ukraine. On Tuesday, President Emmanuel Macron of France said his country could offer diplomatic "protection" to a Russian state television employee who was detained and fined over an on-air antiwar protest on Monday. The employee, Marina Ovsyannikova, burst onto the live broadcast of Russia's most-watched news program on Monday evening, yelling, "Stop the war!" and holding a sign that read, "They're lying to you here." Russia also faced further isolation from Britain, which imposed sanctions on more than 370 people it labeled oligarchs, political allies of, or propagandists for Mr. Putin. Among those blacklisted: XXX, the former president of Russia; XXX, the current prime minister; and XXX, the billionaire founder of Alfa Bank, one of the country's largest private banks. Russia, for its part, said it had sanctioned 13 Americans including Mr. Biden, Secretary of State Antony J. Blinken and Defense Secretary XXX in response to American sanctions against Mr. Putin and other officials. Also on its list was XXX, the former secretary of state, and Mr. Biden's son, XXX. Mr. Biden's press secretary, XXX, shrugged off the news, suggesting in jest that the Kremlin's announcement might have missed its intended mark. The president, Ms. XXX said, is a "junior, so they might have sanctioned his dad by mistake." The West's Wager: As the Ruble Tanks, So XXX Favor By targeting Russia's central bank with sanctions, experts said, American and European leaders have taken aim at what could be one of President Vladimir V. Putin's greatest weaknesses: the country's currency. In Russian cities, anxious customers started lining up on Sunday in front of A.T.M.s, hoping to withdraw the money they had deposited in banks, fearful it would run out. The panic spread on Monday. To try to restore calm, the Bank of Russia posted a notice on its website: "The volume of bank notes ready for loading into A.T.M.s is more than sufficient. All customer funds on bank accounts are fully preserved and available for any transactions." Even before the sanctions were announced over the weekend, the ruble had weakened. On Monday it plunged further, with the value of a single ruble dropping to less than 1 cent at one point. As the value of any currency drops, more people will want to get rid of it by exchanging it for one that is not losing value - and that, in turn, causes its value to drop further. In Russia today, as the purchasing power of the ruble drops sharply, consumers who hold it are finding that they can buy less with their money. In real terms, they become poorer. Such economic instability could stoke popular unhappiness and even unrest. "If people trust the currency, the country exists," said XXX, a research fellow at the Hoover Institution at Stanford University. "If they don't, then it goes up in smoke." The sanctions aimed at the banking system were announced during a tense weekend in which Mr. Putin put his nuclear forces on a higher level of alert. The United States, the European Commission, Britain and Canada agreed to remove some Russian banks from the international system of payments known as SWIFT and to restrict Russia's central bank from using its storehouse of hundreds of billions of dollars' worth of international reserves to undermine the sanctions. Kicking banks out of SWIFT has gotten the most public attention, but the measures taken against the central bank are potentially the most devastating. XXX, the president of the European Commission, said it would "freeze its transactions" and "make it impossible for the central bank to liquidate its assets." On Monday, the U.S. Treasury Department offered more details on how the sanctions would work, saying they would paralyze the Bank of Russia's assets in the United States and stop Americans from engaging in transactions involving the central bank, Russia's National Wealth Fund or the Russian Ministry of Finance. As expected, there are exemptions for transactions related to energy exports, on which Europe relies. "The move on the central bank is absolutely shocking in its sweeping wording," said XXX, the director of the European Institute at Columbia University. On Monday, the British government banned transactions with the Russian central bank, the foreign ministry and the sovereign wealth fund. But if the allies were to impose a full-fledged freeze of the vast amount of dollars, euros, pounds and yen that are owned by Russia but held in Western banks, it could devastate the Russian economy, causing spiraling inflation and a severe recession. At the heart of the move to restrict the Bank of Russia are its foreign exchange reserves. These are the vast haul of convertible assets - other nations' currencies and gold - that Russia has built up, financed in large part through the money it earns selling oil and gas to Europe and other energy importers. The crux of why the Western allies have such leverage comes down to a reality of the modern financial system: Although Russia's central bank owns the assets, it doesn't control them. As Mr. XXX explained, the Bank of Russia has roughly $640 billion in foreign exchange reserves on paper - or rather as electronic entries. But a big chunk of that money is not in Russian vaults or financial institutions. Rather, it is held by central and commercial banks in YYY, London, Berlin, Paris, YYY and elsewhere around the world. In countries like Russia, where the currency is not so stable, the ability to convert to a strong and trusted one like the dollar or the euro is crucial. It is evidence that the home currency - in this case the Russian ruble - has value. Russia's vast store of foreign exchange backs up that value. It assures households and businesses that they can convert their rubles whenever they want, and makes sure that the nation can protect its exchange rate with other currencies. The reserves also lubricate the day-to-day transactions of Russian businesses that export and import. But once workers, managers, owners and financiers worry that they can't trade their rubles for dollars or euros - because banks don't have access to their foreign exchange reserves - they lose confidence. It is a point that XXX himself reportedly made more than a century ago, which was repeated by the economist XXX Keynes: "There is no subtler, no surer means of overturning the existing basis of society than to debauch the currency." The Bank of Russia can try to prop up the value of the ruble by using its reserves to buy up rubles that people are selling. But it can do that only as long as it has access to foreign reserves. The question is how long it can make those transactions. According to Mr. XXX's calculations, Russian individuals and companies have deposited $268 billion in foreign denominations in Russian banks. Yet the central bank has just about $12 billion of cash in hand - an astonishingly small amount, he said. As for the rest of Russia's foreign exchange reserves, roughly $400 billion is invested in assets held outside the country. Another $84 billion is invested in Chinese bonds, and $139 billion is in gold. The central bank could trade in some of those bonds for renminbi, which would enable it to buy goods from China but not from other countries. It could also sell gold, although Mr. XXX argues that there will be few buyers for the tons that Russia has on hand. Other estimates put the amount of assets held outside Russia at closer to $300 billion. The potentially dire consequences for the economy are the same. "If the ruble collapses, it could usher in severe inflation and exacerbate a brewing recession," XXX, an associate professor of international relations at YYY, said, noting that his views were his own and not those of the government or military. "The economic consequences of these measures could turn out to be far more severe than other measures that have gotten more attention in the media," he added. "This gets at the Russian government's basic tools to manage its macroeconomy." The United States and some of its allies previously imposed similar sanctions on YYY, Iran and Syria, but they all have much smaller economies than Russia. The Bank of Russia took steps on Monday to restore confidence, and more than doubled interest rates to 20 percent from 9.5 percent in order to offset the rapid depreciation of the ruble. The bank also released an additional $7 billion worth of reserves that had been set aside as collateral for loans and closed down the Moscow stock exchange for the day. Meanwhile, the foreign ministry moved to order companies to sell 80 percent of their foreign currencies, in a bid to gin up demand for rubles and prevent them from stockpiling dollars and euros. Mr. XXX warned that the West's attack on the Russian ruble needed to be handled with care. "We don't want to destroy them," he said. "We don't want the political system to collapse." Standing in Russia's Way as the Bodies Pile Up and Life Goes On MYKOLAIV, Ukraine - Alla Ryabko stood in the courtyard of the city morgue, trembling with grief and rage. Her son, Capt. XXX, had been killed in fighting on the first day of the war in Ukraine, but two weeks had passed and his body had not yet been prepared for burial. "He's there lying in a bag," she said, gesturing to the covered bodies on the ground. "They're not even giving him to me so that I can wash him. I have to take him away in a bag, a garbage bag." The morgue is overflowing. Bodies are being released to families in the state they arrived, half-dressed in shredded military uniforms, spackled with blood and blackened by fire. Bodies are in the corridor, in the administrative offices, in the courtyard, in a storage shed nearby. They are soldiers and civilians, wrapped in sheets or carpets or nothing at all. Even as Ms. XXX cried out her anguish, artillery strikes shook the ground beneath her feet. There were already 132 bodies in the morgue that day. More would be on the way. There is shelling every day in Mykolaiv. It usually starts before dawn, as a rumble or a thud or a thwack. It electrifies the air and sends a jolt through the gut, and those who choose to stay in bed, rather than flee to a basement, can shut their eyes and let their ears paint a picture of the battle raging in the dark. Russian forces want to take Mykolaiv because it stands in their way. The Varvarivsky Bridge in the city is the only passage for miles across the wide mouth of the Southern Buh River. By seizing the bridge, Russian fighters can push along the Black Sea coast west to Odessa, the headquarters of the Ukrainian Navy and the country's largest civilian port. To get to the bridge, they have to go through the Ukrainian fighters who, so far, have not budged. And so the Russian troops bomb, randomly and indiscriminately, striking neighborhoods, hospitals and supermarkets, opting for terror in the absence of military gain. At least a dozen civilians were killed by airstrikes over the weekend, according to the local authorities. Yet there is also a refusal to succumb. Trash is still being collected, and city workers have embarked on an aggressive tree-pruning campaign, though the shelling is knocking down some of those trees. There is the family who closed down a high-end interior design business and now drives around the city all day delivering food to needy residents, pausing only on occasion to dash into a basement for cover. There is the group of local guys who banded together to try to fix a Russian tank damaged in the fighting so that Ukraine's military might use it. A few blocks from the morgue, the Coffee Go cafe is doing a brisk business, even as artillery fire rattles the plate-glass windows. When the owners tried to close down, their teenage employees rebelled, said XXX, an 18-year-old barista with a streak of orange in her hair. "We wanted to work," she said. "I'm not scared of anything." Once a center of shipbuilding for YYY, Mykolaiv was among the first places attacked after President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia gave the order to invade on Feb. 24. The Russian troops have pressed deep into the city limits, only to be pushed out, leaving behind the burned-out carcasses of armored vehicles. No one knows how long Ukrainian defenders can hold. Russian forces have attacked with tanks, artillery and fighter jets, pummeling the city on three sides. Every day brings more death. But also defiance. "Good morning. We're from Ukraine." So begins the typical morning video message from XXX, the regional governor. The joke among city residents is that nobody will leave their homes unless Mr. XXX says it is safe, and no one can sleep soundly until Mr. XXX wishes them good night. It is only a slight exaggeration. His upbeat videos on Facebook and Telegram, which he invariably opens by flashing a peace sign and toothy smile, typically garner half a million views, roughly equal to the city's population. "When he smiles, we can go to bed," said XXX, who has been volunteering to deliver food to the needy. "If XXX says we can sleep calmly, then we can sleep calmly." Mr. XXX posts videos throughout the day, a mix of reassurance and withering denigration of Russian forces, whom he refers to alternatively as idiots, bastards and orcs, the evil snaggletoothed army of the east in Tolkien's "The Lord of the Rings." The messages are meant to bolster the spirits of city residents, even if the booms they are hearing sound terrifyingly close. "What can I say, the 17th day of war, all is well, the mood is excellent," Mr. XXX said in a message over the weekend that began with news of an airstrike on a residential neighborhood. "We have freedom and we're fighting for it. And all they have is slavery. We want all of our dreams to come true and we're moving in that direction. Together to victory." A month ago, Mr. XXX's main priorities centered around improving roads and the region's tourism infrastructure, including big plans to develop a resort on a picturesque piece of the Black Sea coast. "These were costly, large, beautiful projects that were needed, and in one day this was destroyed," Mr. XXX said. Now he coordinates with the military for the defense of the city. Meeting for an interview at the regional administration headquarters, Mr. XXX was dressed in green cargo pants with a black pistol holstered to his belt. He predicted that any Russian effort to take Mykolaiv would lead to a bloody and destructive street-by-street firefight. Every street corner has a pile of tires and a ready incendiary bomb sitting next to it. Should Russian forces enter the city, residents are prepared to quickly plunge them into a smoky blackness, giving cover as the Ukrainian defenders attempt to pick off the Russian tanks one by one. It would be apocalyptic, Mr. XXX said. "My strategy is to be much more joyous than is appropriate for this kind of situation," he said. "This doesn't mean that I don't understand how serious things are." The fireball lit up the night sky like an early sunrise. Another day of Russian shelling had begun. It was Monday, March 7, and Russian forces had launched an early-morning attack that jolted residents from their beds. They fled into makeshift bomb shelters, basements that many residents have outfitted with mattresses and shipping pallets for sleeping because they now spend so much time there. "They attacked our city dishonorably, cynically, while people were sleeping," Mr. XXX said in one of his messages. A cruise missile had hit a barracks filled with sleeping soldiers from the 79th Ukrainian Air Assault Brigade. Eight were killed and another eight were missing, their bodies buried in the pile of rubble. The strike opened the barracks like a dollhouse, revealing an eerie glimpse into a soldier's daily life: gray steel bunk beds, regulations posted on the wall. It could have been worse had the missile not first slammed into a line of poplar trees, sending it slightly off target. "We were very lucky that these poplar trees were here because if it were a direct strike we would have all been screwed," said a soldier named XXX, who was helping to search for bodies. "The poplars bent the rocket's trajectory." It was the same across Mykolaiv that day. In one neighborhood of densely packed apartment blocks, residents alternated between clearing out their shattered homes and dashing to basement bomb shelters amid continuing strikes. One woman, when approached by a reporter, unleashed such a torrent of profanity directed at Mr. Putin that she felt the need to apologize, and then burst into tears. The missile strikes had blown out windows and sprayed shrapnel through furniture, walls and appliances. "Look at how the Russian world is saving us," XXX, a mother of two, said, referring sarcastically to Mr. Putin's claim that Russia was waging a war of liberation. "We were living fine and had everything we needed. Now they're bombing residential neighborhoods, women and children. We have no weapons. All we can do is hide in the basement. We have no strength for anything else." In the tidy neighborhood of Balabanivka, residents were cleaning up after Russian jets dropped a payload of bombs early in the morning that leveled homes and killed several residents. A bomb had carved a large crater out of what used to be XXX backyard, and three chickens sat beside the mangled remains of their hut. An acrid smell hung in the air. "Come, let me show you how we survived," Mr. XXX said, leading a visitor into the shallow basement where he had hidden during the bombing with his wife, their child and his parents. The basement looked like it had been turned upside down and shaken. Cabinets had been ripped off the wall; part of the backyard was pushed through the windows. "They're worse than the fascists," Mr. XXX, 32, a businessman, said of the Russian forces. "They're saying they only target military objects, military structures. Well, there's nothing like that here." Despite his fear of more bombing, Mr. XXX said that he and his family had no plans to go anywhere. "We'll rebuild," he said. "I still have hands." Two older women were sitting on a bench in a city park, watching three young children play, when their conversation was interrupted by an ominous droning sound. An air raid siren. The women kept talking. After a few minutes, they slowly rose, bundled the youngest child into a stroller, and walked away in no great hurry. Russian rocket attacks may now set the rhythm of life in Mykolaiv, but many residents are determined to play the song in a key of their own choosing. "There is no panic," said Ms. XXX, who spoke so admiringly of Mr. XXX, the governor. "Our people coolly evaluate the situation and help one another." Before the war, Ms. XXX and her husband, Aleksandr, had planned to open a second branch of their interior design business in Bucha, an up-and-coming suburb of Kyiv where their son, XXX, had moved into a sleek, newly built development. Last week, they were instead driving around Mykolaiv, their hometown, passing out food and nervously awaiting news from XXX. He was attempting to escape XXX with his pet rabbit, Diva, after hiding in a basement for several days from the Russian troops who had occupied the suburb. "There are those moments when morale falters and when your mood sours," said Ms. XXX, who was carrying an Orthodox icon of the Virgin Mary. "But when you see that someone needs your help and support, you have to get up and move. Then you realize that it will come to an end because the truth is on our side." There has been an exodus from Mykolaiv during the past two weeks. On some mornings, large convoys of cars and buses, some with homemade cardboard signs saying, "Children," have snarled traffic at the Varvarivsky Bridge. The bridge is the escape route. It is also a prize that Russian forces covet. But should they enter the city, in addition to Ukrainian military forces, the Russian troops will have to face people like XXX, a local journalist who has put down his pen in favor of a submachine gun. On a recent visit to the offices of his online news outlet, there were more guns than journalists, and boxes of ammunition littered the floor. "All of us are participating in the resistance," Mr. XXX said. The Russian forces will also have to contend with XXX, a 54-year-old bus driver. Last week, Mr. XXX was with neighbors, cigarettes dangling from their lips, peering into the open engine bay of a Russian T-90 tank. A day earlier, Ukrainian forces had blown up a bridge as the tank was crossing over. It was still functional but could only drive in circles. A white Z, which has been used by the Russian forces to identify their vehicles, had been painted over in green, and the tank's antenna mast sported a Ukrainian flag. Mr. XXX wanted to get it running and turn it against the Russian troops. "We're just locals. I'm not a mechanic. I'm just helping," he said. "What else are we supposed to do? We need to help somehow. I'm not going to sit at home and hide." At City Hospital No. 3, XXX sat up in a cot, sobbing. A 40-year-old mother, she was wearing a peach dress with black polka dots, her shoulder and leg covered by large bandages soaked through with blood. Two days earlier, Ms. XXX and six of her colleagues from a local orphanage were driving to a small village where the children had been evacuated at the start of the war. About 15 miles outside of the city, she said, an armored Russian fighting vehicle, emblazoned with a white Z, opened fire on the van. "First they shot at us with automatic weapons," Ms. XXX said. "Then the car caught on fire and filled with smoke." "Get out, get out," she said the soldiers had told her. "They put us on our knees, pointed their weapons at us and took our telephones." "We asked them to give them back," she said. Their reply: "No, not possible. We have orders." Three of Ms. XXX's colleagues were incinerated by the fire that engulfed the van, she said. Ms. XXX was shot twice in the shoulder and once in the leg. "There were rockets everywhere, bombs," she added. "All we heard were the sounds of explosions." On just one day, Ms. XXX was one of 25 patients being treated for wounds from shelling and gunfire, according to the hospital's medical director, XXX. Earlier in the week, shells had landed in the hospital courtyard, spraying shrapnel in all directions, he added. "We thought coronavirus was a nightmare," Mr. XXX said. "But this is hell." Black strafe marks pock a prop plane that sits on the runway of Mykolaiv's small international airport. Inside, the security screening area has been gutted, and in a second-floor lounge are the remains of a soldier's dinner of canned sardines in tomato sauce. Early in the war, Russian troops held the airport briefly, only to be quickly expelled by Ukrainian fighters. Since then, the Russian forces have kept trying to gain control so that their transport planes can bring in troops and equipment to feed their fight and continue their push west. But, for now, the Ukrainians keep stopping them. Video taken by Ukrainian troops show them firing shoulder-mounted rockets from the roof of the airport at Russian fighters below. On a recent visit, the Ukrainian flag was flying. "We have a very strong position and we're waiting for them," said XXX. XXX, who insisted on practicing his English with a reporter. "There is nothing unexpected. We know they are arriving and from where they're arriving. And we're ready to say, 'Hello, Russian stupid boys.'" Sergeant XXX said that Russian forces appeared to be probing for weakness. They launch attacks from the north and northeast, then switch directions and come from the south. Often, he said, attacks are preceded by overflights of Russian surveillance drones. "They are trying to attack us from different sides to taste our protection, to taste our power," he said. "Russian troops did not expect such a strong army." Maj. Gen. XXX, commander of Ukraine's military forces in Mykolaiv, said that the Ukrainian strategy was to break morale through an unrelenting pounding of Russian positions. But there is another critical factor. "We are defending our homes, our women, our families," he said. "We don't need their world. We don't need their language. Let them build their own country and die in it and create whatever dictatorship they want there. We're going to live like free people." On Monday, Mr. XXX was somber in his evening video message. He acknowledged that the situation had grown more serious, while denigrating the Russian troops as "idiots" for attacking civilian areas with rockets. "There's no logical sense to it," he said. "But the initiative is on our side, and we're moving." With that, on the 18th day of the war, he sent the people of Mykolaiv to bed. "I wish everyone a boring night." Europe Braces For High Costs Of Refugee Aid Nearly everyone who crossed the YYY on the open-air ferry from Ukraine and landed in the frostbitten Romanian port city of Isaccea on a recent morning had a roller bag and a stopgap plan. One woman planned to join her husband in YYY. Another was headed to YYY, where her company has its headquarters. Others were meeting brothers, cousins, in-laws and friends in Paris or YYY, YYY or YYY. And then, they hoped to go back to Ukraine. "I need to return," said XXX, who traveled with her 10-year-old son and 5-year-old daughter from Odessa. "My husband, my mother and my grandmother are there." She said she planned to go home in a month. Whether such quick turnabouts are possible is one of the many uncertainties hanging over Europe's fastest-growing refugee crisis since World War II. No matter how the catastrophe in Ukraine ends, the costs of helping the millions of Ukrainians fleeing Russian bombs will be staggering. Some early estimates put the bill for housing, transporting, feeding and processing the flood of humanity at $30 billion in the first year alone. "This is a humanitarian and medical emergency in the next weeks," said XXX, director of the Global Migration Center at the University of California, Davis. What happens over the next few months will determine if Europe will face the additional costs of a massive resettlement that has the potential to reshape the economic landscape. European economies are still recovering from the pandemic and coping with stubborn supply chain shortages and high inflation. As costly as it will be to provide short-term relief to families temporarily displaced by the war, over the long term the expense of integrating millions of people would be much greater and put immense strain on housing, education and health care systems. While a giant influx of workers, particularly skilled ones, is likely to increase a nation's output over time, it could intensify competition in the job market. Roughly 13 million people were unemployed in the European Union in January. "It is uncertainty that now dominates the economic calculation," Mr. XXX said. More than three million refugees fled Ukraine in less than three weeks, according to the U.N. International Organization for Migration, and millions more are likely to follow as the war rages on. Officials, migration experts and economists say it is too early to say whether most displaced Ukrainians will end up staying. That is a stark contrast to 2015, when 1.3 million migrants from the Middle East and YYY escaped to Europe after years of war and terror, seeking asylum because they feared persecution. Return was not an option. So far, officials say, relatively few have asked for such protection. Of the 431,000 Ukrainians who have crossed into Romania, for example, only 3,800 have asked for asylum. Indeed, many winced at the "refugee" label. "I don't consider myself a refugee," XXX, a lawyer, said through a translator as he waited to cross into the northeastern Romanian town of YYY. But with his wife, three children and their bags crammed into one of hundreds of cars inching toward the border, he acknowledged that he looked the part. The urgent humanitarian and moral case is compelling on its face; the economic argument can be harder to make. Most research, though, over the long term shows that working refugees can help economies grow, expanding a nation's productive capacity, paying taxes and generating more business for grocery stores, hair salons, and clothing and electronics stores. That was what happened in Germany after 2015 when it took in more than a million refugees, most of them from Syria. "Economically speaking it was a net positive," said XXX, head of European economics at Oxford Economics. But countries face significant initial costs. The European Union last week pledged 500 million euros, or $550 million, in humanitarian support, but it will have to put up more. "European governments are going to blow the budget," said XXX, chief eurozone economist for Pantheon Macroeconomics. This latest drain comes on top of an extraordinary amount of public spending over the last two years to battle the coronavirus pandemic. The sudden need for more housing, fuel, food, health care services and more is going to further exacerbate supply shortages. "Inflation is going to go up, up, up," Mr. XXX said. In the eurozone, inflation is running at 5.8 percent, and Mr. XXX said he expected it to rise to 7 percent this year given soaring energy prices. Those are up by nearly a third since last year. For the European Central Bank, he added, it will make the delicate task of balancing the risk of inflation with the risk of recession all the more difficult. For those living and working in Europe, it will mean less spending power in the short run. If wages don't rise, they will be poorer. For now, Ukrainians, with strong kinship, cultural and religious ties in other European countries, have mostly been met with care packages and offers of free shelter, transportation and food. At the border in YYY, volunteers rushed up to Ukrainian families trudging up the road with offers of cups of hot tea and 5 cellphone SIM cards. Organizations, businesses and individuals jockeyed for a spot closest to the checkpoint to be the first to give chicken soup, kebabs, blankets, toothbrushes, stuffed animals and hats. The government in YYY has so far allocated $49 million to cover the costs. The prime minister, XXX, said he expected the European Union to reimburse a big chunk of that. The E.U. has granted Ukrainians immediate permission to stay for up to three years, get a job and go to school - access that migrants from other parts of the globe could only dream of. And some countries, including Romania and Poland, have agreed to allow refugees to receive the same social and health services available to their own citizens. Yet past experience with refugee crises shows that such good will often sours as an influx stretches government finances and social services like education and health care. There has been an outpouring of sympathy and contributions, but the burden of actually hosting the refugees is lopsided in the extreme. Poland alone has had roughly 1.7 million Ukrainians stream in, and Warsaw's population has swelled by 15 percent. "We're getting overwhelmed," XXX, the city's mayor, said in a news interview. "We can't improvise anymore." XXX, a policy fellow at the Center for Global Development, said a handful of nations were taking on what should be an international responsibility and needed financial help to do so. Global institutions like the World Bank are an important source of cheap loans, particularly for the poorest European countries, which are hosting the most Ukrainians, argued Ms. XXX, a co-author of an analysis of the refugee crisis' costs. International financial support can help tamp down the political and social backlash that often follows refugee crisis, she added. If many of the Ukrainian refugees end up staying longer than they expect, there are reasons to believe that they can be integrated into the economy relatively quickly. Many have a network of friends and family. Their level of education is not that different from some of the host countries. (In Ukraine, the average number of years of school was 11.3 in 2017, according to the United Nations.) And they have a record of employment. Mr. XXX, at the University of California, said Ukrainian immigrants already in Europe were working in hotels and restaurants and as home assistants for seniors and disabled people, jobs that have been hard to fill in some places. Despite the widening devastation inflicted by the Russians on Ukraine, few of the people interviewed at the border were ready to start contemplating a long future far from home. XXX, who was crossing into YYY with her three children, two sisters-in-law and her father-in-law in a blue Toyota van, said they were headed to YYY. They had budgeted roughly 1,500 ($1,644) per person for a one month stay. In Ukraine, she said, "we have houses, husbands and jobs there." Asked what they planned to do once they crossed the border, Ms. XXX was about to respond when her sister-in-law XXX piped up from the back seat: "Go back home." Path to war in Ukraine was laid in months of plans, warnings The week before Russia attacked, a Ukrainian soldier peered through a periscope from the bottom of his trench. Mud seeped into his boots, his clothes and every crack in his gear as he walked the narrow space where he had spent his days for the past 10 months. XXX was just 23. He had no memory of Ukraine as anything but a fully independent country. But now he was charged with helping to keep it that way, posted at Ukraine's eastern front line since early last spring, when 100,000 Russian land and naval forces first encircled most of his country. "These wars for territory are madness," he said, "but probably this is human nature." Within days, Ukraine was engulfed by what the soldier in the trench saw as humanity's dark impulse. The largest invasion Europe has seen since World War II has imperiled a young democracy while risking geopolitical instability far beyond the flashpoints of the new war. In the conflict's earliest days, each side has managed to surprise the other. Russia unleashed a broader, larger invasion than almost anyone had predicted. And Ukraine, at least by U.S. and other Western accounts, has put up a more tenacious fight than many thought possible against the neighboring superpower. Fortunes can turn at any moment. "It's not apparent to us that the Russians over the last 24 hours have been able to execute their plans as they deemed that they would. But it's a dynamic, fluid situation," Pentagon press secretary XXX said Friday. And so it has been for much of the past year. Russia alternately added and subtracted troops along the border, diplomacy seemed to make progress until it didn't, Russian President Vladimir Putin seemed restrained, then not, then maybe, then not. The path to war was convoluted - but also inexorable. It was back on March 31 of last year when the U.S. military raised an alert of a "potential imminent crisis" arising from Russian drills near the Ukrainian border. Not long after, Russian troops were ordered back to their permanent bases and the sense of alarm eased. But those orders also required Russian troops to leave their heavy weaponry in Crimea and the YYY region bordering Ukraine, where it would already be in place if the forces returned - which they did. The reprieve was brief for Leshchyshyn's unit and for Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy, who had tweeted that the redeployment "proportionally reduces tension." Soon afterward, U.S. President XXX agreed to meet Russian President Vladimir Putin in YYY, a summit widely seen as a reward for suspending the drills. But by the end of summer, it was clear that Putin's military plans were just getting started - even if they hadn't quite taken shape yet. When YYY visited Washington on Sept. 1, he came away with a pledge of $60 million in military aid. XXX's life in the deserted front-line village of YYY continued as before, circumscribed by the labyrinth of trenches he commanded. The monotony of four-hour shifts on guard was broken by periodic exchanges of fire with Russia-backed separatists, and by the news he caught on his mobile phone. Roots poked out along the walls of the trench, but they were never enough to hold up the mud when a shell exploded nearby. Those not on guard duty shored up the sides with hand shovels. When they returned to their basement barracks in a house with no roof, the same shovels scraped the congealed mud from their boots. When night fell, the village was dark and quiet enough that XXX's men and the separatists sometimes shouted curses at each other from their respective trenches. By early November, the mud was back, thick enough to weigh down the soldiers' boots. So were the Russian troops - 90,000 of them again near the border, with more on the way from all corners of the world's largest country. The warnings from the Biden administration grew more pointed, and for the first time, U.S. intelligence officials started sharing specifics with Zelenskyy, European officials and eventually the public. The White House realized that it was looking at the beginnings of what would probably turn into an enormous crisis by October. Officials were seeing a cascade of worrying intelligence strains, including troop movements, that suggested that Putin was looking to move on Ukraine. Biden wanted Putin to know what he knew. He sent CIA Director XXX to Moscow to warn Kremlin officials that the U.S. was fully aware of their troop movements. The White House made the calculation that the CIA chief's travels, normally closely held, needed to be advertised far and wide. "We wanted it to be known that he was there and understood by the Russians that we were starting to put them on notice and that we were going to do so publicly as well as privately," said a senior administration official, who spoke on condition of anonymity to discuss internal deliberations. In early December, national security officials shared information from an intelligence document with the press showing at least 70,000 Russian troops had massed near the Ukraine border. Much of the information could be gleaned independently but White House officials thought it was crucial to get the information out in the open "with U.S. government branding." So began a name-and-shame campaign in which the White House national security officials widely distributed a series of plots they contend Putin was weighing to set a pretext for an invasion of Ukraine. Critics of U.S. intelligence - Russian officials among them - recalled past failures like the infamously false identification of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq nearly 20 years ago and the unexpectedly swift fall of YYY last year. In mid-November, a senior European diplomat spoke to The Associated Press on condition of anonymity to discuss confidential briefings. The diplomat was unconvinced by U.S. intelligence findings. "We see the military build-up, at the same time, we don't have any intelligence that there's something like military action, or that Russians would be trying to become militarily active, so we don't share this opinion, even though the Americans have said so," the diplomat said. "We don't see that there is intention on Putin's part so far." At NATO, Germany blocked efforts to help Ukraine acquire military equipment. France and Germany objected to launching NATO's crisis management system, but eventually relented at a NATO foreign ministers' meeting in Latvia on Dec. 1. The move was essentially symbolic. The system is used to identify whether there is a crisis and launch preliminary planning to respond. With some satisfaction, Putin said the military buildup has caused a "certain stress" in the West. "It's necessary to keep them in that condition for as long as possible" to secure long-term security guarantees for Russia, he added. He laid down his demands on Dec. 15: a ban on NATO membership for Ukraine and other ex-Soviet nations, a halt to the deployment of NATO weapons in those countries and a rollback of NATO forces from Eastern Europe. Meanwhile Russian troops kept arriving in Belarus to Ukraine's north and on its eastern frontiers where heavy weaponry had been stockpiled since the spring. Zelenskyy continued to play down the troop movements, noting that Ukraine had been facing threats from Russia and the separatists since 2014, when Russia annexed Crimea. On Jan. 10, Russia's deputy foreign minister insisted there were "no plans, intentions or reasons to attack Ukraine." The U.S. did not believe it. Two days later, the United States and NATO rejected Russia's demands, and the movement of troops and weapons accelerated. Ukrainian government websites went down en masse, many displaying a warning from the suspected Russian-linked hackers: "Be afraid and expect worse." On Jan. 20, Russia announced sweeping naval drills off the coast of Ukraine and Biden said publicly he believed Russia planned an invasion. On Feb. 4, Putin flew to Beijing, ostensibly for the Olympic Games although Russian athletes were banned from competing under their nation's flag because of years of doping scandals. He and Chinese President Xi Jinping reaffirmed their support for each other's foreign policy, including Russia's backing of China's claim to YYY. The unspoken message: These two world powers were on the same page or a similar page, and China would not stand with most of the rest of the world against Putin's designs on Ukraine. By then, 150,000 Russian troops had all but surrounded Ukraine and the United States had all but abandoned hope for a diplomatic solution. French President Emmanuel Macron attempted a last-ditch intervention. Flying first to Moscow to meet Putin, where the men sat across an absurdly long marble table, then to Kyiv, Macron tried fruitlessly to stave off war. Publicly Macron said Putin assured him that Russia would not escalate the crisis. But privately he described the Russian leader as "more rigid, more isolated and fundamentally lost in a sort of ideological and security drift," according to a senior French official. The American warnings grew increasingly frantic, but life in YYY capital and its largest population center - continued as usual because, Zelenskyy insisted, Ukrainians would not yield to panic. On Feb. 16, a Wednesday, Ukraine held a "day of national unity" after a date floated as the potential Russian attack failed to materialize. Russia's ambassador to the European Union, XXX, accused Westerners of "slander" for alleging an invasion was afoot and joined other Russian officials in ridiculing Biden's prediction that it could start as soon as that Wednesday. "Wars in Europe rarely start on a Wednesday," XXX said sarcastically. But Zelenskyy ordered Ukrainian soldiers to be restrained and give Russia no excuses to attack. Shelling and gunfire at the front lines with the separatists increased exponentially, according to international monitors, but Ukrainian troops were told not to return fire. On Feb. 17, U.S. Secretary of State XXX Blinken laid out "what the world can expect to see unfold. In fact, it's unfolding right now." First, he said, there would be a staged provocation. Then would come a theatrical high-level meeting of the Russian government, followed by a proclamation that Russia must defend ethnic Russians in Ukraine. Then, he said, the attack would begin, with Kyiv a main target. Events would largely, perhaps fully, prove him right. "We've been warning the Ukrainian government of all that is coming," Blinken said, looking directly at the camera. "And here today, we are laying it out in great detail, with the hope that by sharing what we know with the world, we can influence Russia to abandon the path of war and choose a different path while there's still time." On the night of Feb. 19, the separatist leaders released near-simultaneous videos announcing a general evacuation of women, children and the elderly. One of those pro-Russia separatists showed video of what he said was a car bomb exploding his personal vehicle - ostensibly, proof that Ukrainian troops were provoking a war. The destroyed 4X4, however, was a suspiciously older model and metadata showed the videos were actually filmed three days earlier. Putin summoned his top security officials and, in a dramatic pre-recorded meeting televised nationwide, asked them to explain one by one whether Russia should recognize the separatists and help them. One by one they agreed; there was little prospect that they would not. Hours later, the Kremlin released yet another pre-recorded video, this time of Putin alone, cataloging Russian grievances against Ukraine, NATO, the United States and Europe. An independent Ukrainian nation, he said, was a fiction. Without evidence, he accused Ukraine of genocide and of seeking nuclear weapons. Russia, he insisted, had every right to attack such a country. "I would now like to say something very important for those who may be tempted to interfere in these developments from the outside," he added. "They must know that Russia will respond immediately, and the consequences will be such as you have never seen in your entire history." The attack began before dawn on Feb. 24 - Thursday in Ukraine but, as it happens, still Wednesday in Washington. It opened with the firing of more than 100 land- and sea-based missiles in the first hours, said a senior U.S. official who was not authorized to be identified and spoke on condition of anonymity. The official said the main targets of the air assault were barracks, ammunition warehouses, and 10 airfields. Russian ground forces began moving in from Belarus around noon. Sanctions from the U.S. and Europe came down with hours, but Zelenskyy, in hiding in the besieged capital on Friday, pleaded for more. He spoke by phone with many foreign leaders. They expressed solidarity and offered help. None offered what he most wanted - troops to come to his country's aid and a no-fly zone to protect Ukraine's skies. He told several of them these phone calls might be his last. "The Ukrainian president started by saying he's reporting from a country where he doesn't know how long it's going to exist," Austrian Chancellor XXX related from his call. "And he's reporting as president without knowing how long he's going to be alive." In an impassioned speech, XXX implored his people to be firm in their resistance. "This morning we are defending our state alone, as we did yesterday," he said. "The world's most powerful forces are watching from afar. Did yesterday's sanctions convince Russia? We hear in our sky and see on our earth that this is not enough." Did Leshchyshyn, the young soldier, hear XXX's cry? Did he survive the first days of the war? It cannot be determined. He spoke to the AP in the trenches a week ago; he has not responded to messages since. Crisis deepens, Ukraine accuses Moscow of 'medieval' tactics LVIV, Ukraine - The humanitarian crisis in Ukraine deepened Monday as Russian forces intensified their shelling and food, water, heat and medicine grew increasingly scarce, in what the country condemned as a medieval-style siege by Moscow to batter it into submission. A third round of talks between the two sides ended with a top Ukrainian official saying there had been minor, unspecified progress toward establishing safe corridors that would allow civilians to escape the fighting. Russia's top negotiator said he expects those corridors to start functioning Tuesday. But that remained to be seen, given the failure of previous attempts to lead civilians to safety amid the biggest ground war in Europe since World War II. Russian President Vladimir Putin's forces continued to pummel cities with rockets, and fierce fighting raged in places. In one of the most desperate cities, the encircled southern port of Mariupol, an estimated 200,000 people were hoping to flee, and Red Cross officials waited to hear when a corridor would be established. The city is short on water, food and power, and cellphone networks are down. Stores have been looted as residents search for essential goods. Police moved through the city, advising people to remain in shelters until they heard official messages broadcast over loudspeakers to evacuate. Hospitals in Mariupol are facing desperate shortages of antibiotics and painkillers, and doctors performed some emergency procedures without them. The lack of phone service left anxious citizens approaching strangers to ask if they knew relatives living in other parts of the city and whether they were safe. In the capital, Kyiv, soldiers and volunteers have built hundreds of checkpoints, often using sandbags, stacked tires and spiked cables. Some barriers looked significant, with heavy concrete slabs and sandbags piled more than two stories high, while others appeared more haphazard, with hundreds of books used to weigh down stacks of tires. "Every house, every street, every checkpoint, we will fight to the death if necessary," said Mayor XXX. In Kharkiv, Ukraine's second-largest city, heavy shelling slammed into apartment buildings. "I think it struck the fourth floor under us," XXX said from his Kharkiv hospital bed. "Immediately, everything started burning and falling apart." When the floor collapsed beneath him, he crawled out through the third floor, past the bodies of some of his neighbors. XXX reported in a Telegram video address that fierce battles continued in the Kyiv region, notably around Bucha, YYY, XXX and Irpin. In the Irpin area, which has been cut off from electricity, water and heat for three days, witnesses saw at least three tanks and said Russian soldiers were seizing houses and cars. A few miles away, in the small town of Horenka, where shelling reduced one area to ashes and shards of glass, rescuers and residents picked through the ruins as chickens pecked around them. "What are they doing?" XXX, a rescue worker, asked of the Russian attackers. "There were two little kids and two elderly people living here. Come in and see what they have done." Russian forces also continued their offensive in Mykolaiv, opening fire on the city some 480 kilometers (300 miles) south of Kyiv, according to Ukraine's military. Rescuers said they were putting out fires caused by rocket attacks in residential areas. At YYY, Netherlands, Ukraine pleaded with the International Court of Justice to order a halt to Russia's invasion, saying Moscow is committing widespread war crimes. Russia "is resorting to tactics reminiscent of medieval siege warfare, encircling cities, cutting off escape routes and pounding the civilian population with heavy ordnance," said XXX, a member of Ukraine's legal team. Russia snubbed the court proceedings, leaving its seats in the Great Hall of Justice empty. Efforts to set up safe passage for civilians over the weekend fell apart amid continued Russian shelling. Before Monday's talks began, Russia announced a new plan, saying civilians would be allowed to leave Kyiv, Mariupol, Kharkiv and YYY. But that offer was quickly dismissed by Ukraine and others as an empty and cynical gesture, since most of the evacuation routes headed toward Russia or its ally Belarus, which has served as a launching pad for the invasion. Ukrainian Deputy Prime Minister XXX blasted the proposal as unacceptable. "I don't know many Ukrainians who want to seek refuge in Russia. That's hypocrisy," French President Emmanuel Macron said in an interview on French news broadcaster LCI. Ukraine instead proposed eight routes allowing civilians to travel to western regions of the country where there is no shelling. The battle for Mariupol is crucial because its capture could allow Moscow to establish a land corridor to Crimea, which Russia seized from Ukraine in 2014. The fighting has sent energy prices surging worldwide and stocks plummeting, and threatens t he food supply and livelihoods of people around the globe who rely on crops farmed in the fertile Black Sea region. The U.N. human rights office reported 406 confirmed civilian deaths but said the number is a vast undercount. The invasion has also sent 1.7 million people fleeing Ukraine. Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy called for more punitive measures, including a global boycott of Russia's oil exports, which are key to its economy. "If (Russia) doesn't want to abide by civilized rules, then they shouldn't receive goods and services from civilization," he said in a video address. Russia's invasion has nearby countries terrified that the violence could spread. U.S. Secretary of State XXX began a lightning visit to the Baltic states of Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia, former Soviet republics that are NATO members. Blinken hoped to reassure them of the alliance's protection. The West has rushed weapons to Ukraine, but NATO has shown no interest in sending troops into the country and has rejected Zelenskyy's pleas to establish a no-fly zone for fear of triggering a wider war. U.K. Moves to Tighten Rules for Oligarchs LONDON - Eighteen months ago, XXX was ushered into the clubby inner circle of aristocratic Britain: the House of Lords, to which he had been nominated for a life peerage by his good friend, Prime Minister Boris Johnson. This week, Mr. XXX, a 41-year-old Russian-British newspaper baron, found himself on far less comfortable ground. Writing on the front page of his paper, London's Evening Standard, Mr. XXX implored President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia to call off his brutal invasion of Ukraine. "As a Russian citizen I plead with you to stop Russians killing their Ukrainian brothers and sisters," said Mr. XXX, whose father was once a K.G.B. officer. "As a British citizen I ask you to save Europe from war. As a Russian patriot I plead that you prevent any more young Russian soldiers from dying needlessly." Mr. XXX's carefully calibrated message reflected the suddenly tricky landscape for wealthy Russians in Britain. Mr. Putin's assault has thrown a harsh spotlight on oligarchs: Most amassed their fortunes thanks to their ties to the Russian leader. They have used London, with its laissez-faire regulatory climate, as a haven to stash wealth or to launder ill-gotten gains. Now, with most of the Western world uniting against Mr. Putin's aggression, Britain is moving to plug an embarrassing loophole to which it has long turned a blind eye. On Tuesday, the government introduced new legislation in Parliament to try to curb the gusher of dirty money into Britain. Under the law, known as the Economic Crime Bill, foreign companies that own property would have to declare the true owners or could ultimately risk confiscation of their assets. "They are beginning to feel the heat," XXX, author of "McMafia," a book on organized crime that inspired a popular TV series, said of the oligarchs. But he said of the plans to tighten the rules, "There is an element of shutting the stable door after the horse has bolted." The new legislation is targeted directly at elite Russians, who have hired battalions of lawyers, bankers and accountants to help them hide their wealth, much of which was amassed through cronyism. Many shield their identities behind shell companies that own property in London's gilded neighborhoods. Transparency International, which campaigns against corruption, estimates that 1.5 billion pounds ($2 billion) of British real estate has been bought by Russians accused of corruption or of having links to the Kremlin. Of that, almost 430 million pounds of property is in YYY, near the heart of government, while 283 million pounds is in affluent YYY and Chelsea. The new legislation also aims to strengthen the use of "unexplained wealth orders," a legal tool allowing the government to seize assets owned by people who cannot prove they were bought with legitimate funds. Since 2018, such orders have been invoked only nine times in four cases. Prosecutors have been reluctant to press cases because they can incur huge legal costs if the prosecutions fail. "This is a significant step forward in terms of tackling Russian money," said XXX, head of advocacy at Transparency International U.K. "These are long overdue promises from the government which are finally coming to fruition." But she added, "there are gaps that the government needs to address." Among them is an exemption for real estate purchased more than 20 years ago. And there would be an 18-month transition period before the law came into effect, giving wealthy owners ample opportunity to sell out. In an interview with ITV on Tuesday, Mr. Johnson, striving to claim the higher ground on this issue, said of those oligarchs who had not spoken out about Ukraine that their "silence is inexplicable." To critics, Britain's action is too little, too late. The government first committed to making these changes six years ago. Yet before Russia moved against Ukraine last week, Mr. Johnson had been expected to push off the measures until at least 2023. "The flow of dirty money into the U.K. and U.S. has been undermining our national security for years," said XXX, a Conservative who is chairman of the foreign affairs committee in the House of Commons. "Since 2018, I've been warning that we're paying for our enemies' weapons." Mr. XXX, whose name has surfaced in recent weeks as a potential successor to Mr. Johnson, has said Britain needs to move away from targeting individuals with "vague" sanctions. Instead, he said, it must impose penalties with teeth, like barring Russian companies from British markets and expelling family members of Russians linked to Mr. Putin. Skeptics wonder how hard the government will push, not just because legal, financial, and other firms have benefited hugely from Russian cash, but also because donations have flowed to Mr. Johnson's Conservative Party. Since he became prime minister in 2019, the party, or its individual constituency associations, have received 1.93 million pounds ($2.5 million) from donors who are either Russian or who made money from Russia, according to calculations by the opposition Labour Party, based on disclosures to the Electoral Commission. Russians who have donated to the YYY, according to the commission's register, include the industrialist XXX and the financier XXX, with whom Mr. Johnson played tennis in exchange for a check before he became prime minister. While foreigners are not allowed to donate to political parties, those who acquire British citizenship can. Nobody is a better example of the cozy ties between Russians and the establishment than Mr. XXX. Mr. Johnson has been a weekend guest at his converted castle in YYY. When the prime minister submitted Mr. XXX's name to the House of Lords Appointments Committee, Britain's security agencies raised red flags, according to a person familiar with the process. While there is no suggestion that Mr. XXX acts as an agent for the Russian government, he inherited his fortune from his father XXX, who once worked for the K.G.B. and later became an oligarch. The office of the younger Mr. XXX did not respond to a request for comment. "What XXX reflects is the utter, shameful hypocrisy of the British government and the Tory Party in particular," Mr. XXX said. For Mr. Johnson, the privileged status of oligarchs has become a sore point abroad. During a visit to Poland on Tuesday, a Ukrainian journalist, XXX, lashed out at him, saying that while children fleeing Ukraine were being subjected to Russian bombardment, London provided a refuge for the children of XXX, a billionaire with longstanding ties to Mr. Putin. "I'm acutely conscious that there is not enough we can do, as the U.K. government, to help in the way that you want," an abashed Mr. Johnson responded. Mr. XXX, who owns the Chelsea soccer club, has moved to insulate his prize asset, announcing he would turn over the "stewardship and care" of the club to its charitable foundation, though he will continue to own it. The next day, Chelsea issued a carefully worded statement that said, "the situation in Ukraine is horrific and devastating" and that it was "praying for peace." In recent days, Mr. XXX, who also holds Israeli and Portuguese passports, said he had been contacted by Ukrainian officials to act as a mediator with Mr. Putin. None of this has stopped a Labour lawmaker, XXX, from demanding that Mr. XXX be stripped of his ownership of Chelsea. For those who have inveighed against dirty money for years, it is hard to shake a sense of cynicism that things will ever change. "There is a reason that London is the money laundering capital of the world," said XXX, an American-born British financier who worked in Russia and has campaigned against corruption and human-rights abuses there. "This is the land of grand announcements and shockingly bad implementation." Still, Mr. XXX said he believed that the harrowing images from Ukraine would shift the ground under the oligarchs, making life uncomfortable for them in ways that no previous conflict had done. On Tuesday, a Conservative lawmaker, XXX, read out in Parliament the names of lawyers who represent oligarchs. "It used to be OK to be in the House of Lords and moonlight for an oligarch on the side," Mr. XXX said. "It used to be totally reasonable to go to a party on an oligarch's yacht. We're in a whole new world now." Hard Reality of Conflict Sinks In Across Russia YYY, Russia - On Feb. 23, XXX, a tank driver in the Russian Army, called his family and said he would be home soon; his unit's military drills in Crimea were just about wrapping up. The next morning, Russia invaded Ukraine, and Mr. XXX hasn't been heard from since. On Monday, Ukraine published a video of a captured soldier in his unit, apologizing for taking part in the invasion. "He had no idea they could send him to Ukraine," Mr. XXX's brother, XXX, said in a phone interview from the south-central Russian region of Bashkortostan. "Everyone is in a state of shock." The reality of war is dawning across Russia. On Wednesday, the Russian Defense Ministry for the first time announced a death toll for Russian servicemen in the conflict. While casualty figures in wartime are notoriously unreliable - and Ukraine has put the total of Russian dead in the thousands - the 498 Moscow acknowledged in the seven days of fighting is the largest in any of its military operations since the war in Chechnya, which marked the beginning of President Vladimir V. Putin's tenure in 1999. Russians who long avoided engaging with politics are now realizing that their country is fighting a deadly conflict, even as the Kremlin gets ever more aggressive in trying to shape the narrative. Its slow-motion crackdown on freedoms has become a whirlwind of repression of late, as the last vestiges of a free press faced extinction. This week, lawmakers proposed a 15-year prison sentence for people who post "fakes" about the war, and rumors are swirling about soon-to-be-closed borders or martial law. The Education Ministry scheduled a video lesson to be shown in schools nationwide on Thursday that described the war against Ukraine as a "liberation mission." And in Moscow, the regional office of the Committee of Soldiers' Mothers of Russia has been fielding 2,000 calls a day since last Thursday. "The parents' first question is: What happened to my child?" said XXX, a senior committee official. "Is he alive?" Seizing on the worries of Russian families, Ukraine has pushed to publicize the fact that many young Russian soldiers were dying or being taken prisoner - a reality that the Russian military did not acknowledge until Sunday, the fourth day of the war. Ukrainian government agencies and volunteers have published videos of disoriented Russian prisoners of war saying they had no idea they were about to be part of an invasion until just before it began, and photographs and footage showed the bodies of Russian soldiers strewn on streets and fields. The videos are reaching some Russians directly. XXX, for instance, identified a friend of hers, XXX, who appeared in one of the videos. In it, Mr. XXX said he "feels guilty for his wrong actions" on Ukrainian soil and calls on President Vladimir V. Putin "to find a compromise to avoid war." To some Russians, the toll in human lives is reason enough to oppose the war, and OVD-Info, an activist group that tallies arrests, has counted at least 7,359 Russians detained during seven days of protests in scores of cities across the country. "It's the third decade of the 21st century, and we are watching news about people burning in tanks and bombed-out buildings," Aleksei A. Navalny, the opposition leader, wrote in a social media post from prison on Wednesday, calling on Russians to continue to rally despite the withering police crackdown. "Let's not 'be against war.' Let's fight against war." Members of the Russian elite also continued to speak out. XXX, a member of Russia's upper house of Parliament, told the independent Dozhd television channel on Sunday that dead Russian soldiers in Ukraine lay "unburied; wild, stray dogs gnawing on bodies that in some cases cannot be identified because they are burned." "I do not identify myself with those representatives of the state that speak out in favor of the war," Ms. XXX said. "I think they themselves do not know what they are doing. They are following orders without thinking." The Russian International Affairs Council, a government-funded think tank, published an article by a prominent expert describing the war as a strategic debacle. The expert, XXX, said Ukrainian society would now "see Russia as an enemy for several decades to come." He added a veiled warning directed at government officials who were now cracking down on people speaking out against the war. "History shows that those who look for 'traitors' sooner or later themselves become victims of 'enthusiasts' and 'well-wishers,'" Mr. XXX, the council's program director, wrote. But the discontent showed no sign of affecting Mr. Putin's campaign, as Russia's assault on Ukraine widened, with heavy fighting reported for the port city of Mariupol on the Sea of Azov. The government signaled it would only intensify its crackdown against the war's critics - including those who called it a "war" rather than, in the Kremlin's anodyne term, a "special military operation." "Individuals who carry out falsification must be punished in the most severe way," said Vasily Piskaryov, a senior lawmaker in Mr. Putin's party. "They are discrediting the absolutely rightful and understandable actions of our armed forces." His proposed punishment: 15 years in prison. The Parliament, which is controlled by the Kremlin, will take up the law on Friday. Some feared that Mr. Putin could go even further, repressing dissent to an extent unseen in Russia since Soviet times. XXX, a scholar who has long studied Mr. Putin, wrote it was "more than logical" to expect that lawmakers this week would approve the imposition of martial law in order to block the open internet, ban all protests and restrict Russians from being able to leave the country. Such speculation, fed by how quickly the Kremlin was moving to block access to individual news media outlets and arrest protesters, has led increasing numbers of Russians to flee the country. Echo of Moscow, Russia's flagship liberal-leaning radio station, was taken off the air on Tuesday for the first time since the Soviet coup attempt of 1991. Leading staff members of Dozhd, Russia's only remaining independent television channel, left the country on Wednesday after access to its website was blocked. "It's clear that the personal security of some of us is under threat," Tikhon Dzyadko, the channel's editor in chief, wrote, explaining why he had decided to "temporarily" depart. There was also evidence that, even though the war took many Russians by surprise, significant numbers had come to accept it as unavoidable or forced upon Russia by an aggressive NATO. The economic crisis touched off by the West's harsh sanctions reinforced that narrative for some. On Wednesday, the ruble plumbed new lows as more companies like Siemens and Oracle announced they would reduce their operations in Russia and as the central bank ordered the Moscow stock exchange to remain shut on Thursday for the fourth straight day. At a Moscow shopping mall on Wednesday, a young couple lining up for cash at an A.T.M. said they opposed the war. And yet they said that the way the world was punishing them for it was not fair, either, considering that the United States had fought its own wars in recent decades without coming under harsh international sanctions. "Just as you can criticize the government, you can criticize Western countries," said XXX, 25, who manages a hookah-bar business. "When there were analogous situations in other countries involving the United States, there were no such attacks, and they didn't drive the country into crisis." And the Committee of Soldiers' Mothers, despite being a firsthand witness to the tragedy wrought by the war, had decided to support it, according to Mr. XXX, the senior official. He echoed the words of Mr. Putin, who last week described his "special military operation" as one of "self-defense." "We understand that no armed conflict comes without victims," Mr. XXX said. "But this was a necessary step, because it was impossible to go on like this." XXX reported from YYY, Russia, and XXX from YYY. XXX contributed reporting from Moscow and XXX contributed from Lviv, Ukraine. XXX One Victor in War: It's China The war in Ukraine is far from over, but a consensus is forming in Chinese policy circles that one country stands to emerge victorious from the turmoil: China. After a confused initial response to Russia's invasion, China has laid the building blocks of a strategy to shield itself from the worst economic and diplomatic consequences it could face, and to benefit from geopolitical shifts once the smoke clears. China's leader, Xi Jinping, has avoided criticizing President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, but he has also tried to distance China from the carnage. His government has denounced the international sanctions imposed on Russia but, so far at least, has hinted that Chinese companies may comply with them, to protect China's economic interests in the West. Mr. Xi reached out to European leaders last week with vague offers of assistance in negotiating a settlement, even as other Chinese officials amplified Russian disinformation campaigns meant to discredit the United States and NATO. On Monday, President Biden's national security adviser, XXX, met with a top Chinese official in YYY, and warned that the United States had "deep concerns" about Beijing's growing alignment with Russia. In the end, China's leadership has calculated that it must try to rise above what it considers a struggle between two tired powers and be seen as a pillar of stability in an increasingly turbulent world. "This means that as long as we don't commit terminal strategic blunders, China's modernization will not be cut short, and on the contrary, China will have even greater ability and will to play a more important role in building a new international order," XXX, a professor at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, YYY, who has advised senior officials, wrote after the invasion in a widely circulated article. At the heart of China's strategy lies a conviction that the United States is weakened from reckless foreign adventures, including, from Beijing's perspective, goading Mr. Putin into the Ukraine conflict. In this view, which in recent days has been echoed in public statements and quasi-official analyses, Russia's invasion has dragged American power and attention toward Europe, making it likely that President Biden, like his recent predecessors, will try but fail to put more focus on China and the broader Asia-Pacific region. "All the difficulties and all the balancing and all the embarrassment that we're talking about, those are short-term," said XXX, the director of the China Program at the Stimson Center in Washington, who has studied Beijing's actions in the lead-up to the war. "In the long run, Russia is going to be the pariah of the international community, and Russia will have no one to turn to but China." China's path ahead is by no means certain. Drawing too close to Russia would risk entrenching animosity toward China in Europe and beyond, a possibility that worries Mr. Xi's government, for all its bluster. And if Germany, France and other allies build up their defenses as promised, the United States could ultimately be freed up to shift more of its military resources toward countering China. Mr. Biden has vowed to rally an "alliance of democracies," while American military leaders say they will not let Ukraine distract them from China. "We also feel very, very anxious because the Russia-Ukraine war will force Europe to lean to the U.S., and then China will be dragged deeper into a dilemma," said XXX, a professor of international relations at Nanjing University. YYY allies in the Pacific, including YYY and YYY, "will also adopt a stronger military posture. So it all seems unfriendly to China." Mr. XXX's meeting in YYY with a top Chinese foreign affairs official, XXX, came amid reports that Russia has asked China to give it military equipment and support for its war in Ukraine, as well economic assistance to help counteract the broad sanctions imposed after the invasion. China has denied those reports. China's initial stumbles after the Russian invasion have raised questions about Mr. Xi's ability to navigate the war's aftershocks. He has repeatedly warned Chinese officials that the world is entering an era of upheaval "the likes of which have not been seen for a century." Yet those officials seemed ill-prepared for the upheaval of Mr. Putin's assault on Ukraine. Up to the day of the invasion, they scoffed at warnings that Russia was poised for war, instead accusing the United States of stoking tensions. Since then, they have struggled to reconcile sympathy for Mr. Putin's security grievances with their often-stated reverence for the principle of national sovereignty, including Ukraine's. Mr. Xi, in a video conference with President Emmanuel Macron of France and Chancellor Olaf Scholz of Germany, lamented "the rekindling of the flames of war" in Europe. Yet his diplomats have fanned the flames of Russian disinformation, accusing the United States of developing biological weapons in Ukraine. "This is just not good for China's international reputation," said XXX, an expert on China-Russia ties at the French Institute of International Relations. "It's not just China's reputation in the West; I think it also affects China's reputation in the non-West, because it's essentially associating itself with an imperial power." China could also face economic disruptions from the war and the Western efforts to punish Russia by restricting trade and cutting off its financial institutions. Chinese officials have denounced such measures, and while the United States and its allies have shown remarkable unity in imposing them, other countries share Beijing's reservations about using powerful economic tools as weapons. In any case, China's economy is large enough to absorb blows that would cripple others. Chinese companies may even end up well positioned to take advantage of Russia's desperate need for trade, as happened when Moscow faced sanctions over the annexation of Crimea in 2014. China's strategy reflects a hardening of views toward the United States since Mr. Biden came to office in 2021 - in large part, because officials had hoped for some easing after the chaotic and confrontational policies of President Donald J. Trump. "In its China strategy, the Biden administration's policy continuities with the Trump administration are clearly bigger than any differences," XXX, president of the China Institutes of Contemporary International Relations in Beijing, wrote late last year. "Biden has repeatedly avowed that the United States is not in a 'new Cold War' with China, but China often feels the chill creeping in everywhere." Whatever happens in the war, China sees its deepening ties to Russia as a way to cultivate a counterweight to the United States. The partnership that Mr. Xi and Mr. Putin celebrated last month at the Winter Olympics in Beijing has become too important to sacrifice, whatever misgivings some officials have about the war. Arguing that the era of American dominance after YYY collapse in 1991 was a historical anomaly, both Mr. Xi and Mr. Putin have embraced geopolitical doctrines that call for their countries to reclaim their status as great powers. Just as Mr. Putin depicts the United States as menacing Russia on its western frontier, Mr. Xi sees American support for YYY, the self-governing island democracy that Beijing claims as its own, as a similar threat off China's coast. In recent weeks, Chinese analysts have repeatedly cited the century-old writings of a British geographer, Sir XXX. Whoever controls Central Europe controls the vast landmass stretching from Europe to Asia, he argued. Whoever controls YYY can dominate the world. A modern Russian proponent of such thinking, XXX, has written extensively on what he sees as a growing clash between the liberal, decadent West and a conservative Eurasian continent with Russia as its soul. Mr. XXX, sometimes called "Putin's philosopher," has built a following in China, appearing in state media and visiting Beijing in 2018 to deliver a series of lectures. His host on that occasion was XXX, a propagandist-academic who has won Mr. Xi's favor and who last year gave a lecture to the Politburo, a council of 25 top party officials. "The West should not have become a hegemon in defining universal standards because the West or Europe, or the West in general is only part of humanity," Mr. XXX told a Chinese state television interviewer in 2019. "And the other part, a majority of human beings, live outside the West, in Asia." Such aversion to international standards for political or human rights, supposedly dictated by the West, has become a recurrent theme in Chinese criticism of the United States. It was the subject of a government position paper in December, intended to counter a virtual summit of democratic countries held by Mr. Biden, and of a long statement that Mr. Putin and Mr. Xi issued when they met in Beijing last month. As it turns to Beijing for support against Western sanctions, Russia will become increasingly beholden to China as its diplomatic and economic lifeline, while serving as its strategic geopolitical ballast, analysts say. "The old order is swiftly disintegrating, and strongman politics is again ascendant among the world's great powers," wrote Mr. XXX of the Chinese University of Hong Kong, YYY. "Countries are brimming with ambition, like tigers eyeing their prey, keen to find every opportunity among the ruins of the old order." Panic and Terror as Crowds Try to Flee Kyiv KYIV, Ukraine - The crowds of exhausted, frightened women and children at Kyiv's central train station on Friday suddenly surged in a near-stampede to a station platform where a train heading to safety in western Ukraine was rumored to be arriving soon. "Hurry! Hurry!" a mother shouted at her children. One couple ran along holding a small boy by the hands between them, so that his feet touched the ground only every few steps. An employee in a train company uniform hurried the crowd along. "Go, go!" the woman said. "Follow the other people." But no train turned up. A few minutes later, the people were on the move again, clambering over the tracks, dragging suitcases and holding babies, trying to reach another platform before the others did. As Russian troops mass outside the city, there is a growing sense of a slowly tightening vise and, in some quarters, rising panic. Kyiv, a city of 2.8 million before the war, is slowly being encircled by Russian troops and armor. Most of the fighting so far has been in towns outside the city, where a miles-long column of Russian armored and military vehicles remains stalled to the northwest. The fear is that the Russian forces will follow the same script as in their assaults on Kharkiv and Mariupol, encircling the city, cutting its inhabitants off from supplies of food and medicine, depriving them of water, electricity and heat, and shelling neighborhoods. Since the war began eight days ago, tens of thousands of people have fled Kyiv, heading west to Lviv and then on to Poland and other destinations in Europe. But tens of thousands more had remained behind, and as the avenues of escape have inexorably narrowed, they are growing increasingly desperate to get out. Roads and rail lines remain open to the city's southwest. But trains for evacuees, so packed that only children get seats, have not nearly been able to take everybody. In time, a train did finally pull into the station and open its doors. The people were quite calm and civil, and there was little shoving, as a couple of thousand women and children packed in tightly. Yet, even as the train pulled away, bound for Lviv, the platform remained thronged. "It's not the first day we tried," said XXX, a Kyiv resident who was traveling with her sister and two nieces. "Look at this crowd. We will never get on, you can see it clearly." She said they would probably give up on escaping the city and instead seek shelter in the city's subway system. In one worrying sign, even as swarms of people sought to travel west, a new flow of displaced persons was surging into the city from the northwest. The trains came from Irpin, an outlying town where the Ukrainian army has mounted a fierce defense against the Russian forces. The cars are filled entirely with women and children, as all men between the ages of 18 and 60 have been ordered to stay behind and aid the war effort. A train conductor said the Russian military was now in combat on the railway tracks out of Irpin, to the west, forcing the evacuees back into the city of Kyiv. The development suggested Russian military encirclement of the capital was tightening. With displaced people arriving from embattled areas to the west and thousands of others desperately trying to depart, chaotic scenes unfolded. "I want to go to Lviv," one woman pleaded, as the crowds surged around her. "Where is the train to Lviv?" A couple stood watching. "Why are they running?" the woman said. "Let's go back to the station and look for the right platform for the Kyiv-Lviv train." But the trains were departing haphazardly, and the time for any announced schedule was long past. "Look, people are panicking," said Elizaveta, 45, who didn't want to offer her last name. "People see it's getting worse and worse. We waited. But now what is there to wait for? Now we see this is not going to get better." XXX, who was hoping to leave with her year-and-a-half-old son, XXX, said she was trying to get to the western city of YYY, to stay with relatives. She had packed only one small bag, leaving behind almost all of XXX's toys, save for two illustrated books about backhoes, one of his fascinations. "He saw one once and was really interested in how it digs," she said. On one of the platforms, an older woman, apparently alone, stood crying, clearly confused and distressed. After spending days in a basement in Irpin to escape the pounding of artillery shells outside, XXX and her daughter, XXX, 6, betrayed no signs of relief, standing stony-faced on the platform after arriving in Kyiv and seeing the chaos at the station. Ms. XXX's husband was not allowed on the train out, which was reserved for women and children. She said she had no idea how she would get out of Kyiv, but said her plan was to make it to Europe. "We want to get out of Ukraine." Thousands of others found themselves in the same predicament. When it became clear that every inch of the train to Lviv was packed with people, those remaining on the platform stood, watching, unsure what to do or where to go. Then the train, just a commuter train pressed into emergency service, jerked into motion and pulled away with a hissing noise and the clacking of wheels on the track, leaving hundreds of people behind. U.S. Will Send More Arms, Defying Moscow LVIV, Ukraine - Russian forces stepped up their campaign of bombardments aimed at devastating Ukraine's cities and towns on Saturday, as the White House announced it was sending an additional $200 million in arms and equipment to help Ukraine, defying Moscow. Soldiers fought street-by-street battles in a leafy suburb of Kyiv, the nation's capital, and some residents wept as they dragged belongings across a destroyed bridge, trying to escape the violence. Russian forces detained the mayor of a captured city, an act that prompted hundreds of outraged residents to pour into the streets in protest. President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine accused Moscow of terrorizing the country in an attempt to break the will of the people. "A war of annihilation," he called it. He said an estimated 1,300 Ukrainian soldiers had been killed in the war, the first time the government had offered the number of its own soldiers killed. Mr. Zelensky denounced what he called the kidnapping of the mayor - who had refused to cooperate with Russian troops after they seized his city - as "a new stage of terror, when they are trying to physically eliminate representatives of the legitimate local Ukrainian authorities." Russian forces have not achieved a major military victory since the first days of the invasion more than two weeks ago, and the assaults reinforced Moscow's strategic turn toward increasingly indiscriminate shelling of civilian targets. The American announcement of more arms for Ukraine's military, including missiles for taking out warplanes and tanks, came just hours after Russia warned that convoys used for the "thoughtless transfer" of weapons to Ukraine would be "legitimate targets" for Russian forces. Unable to mount a quick takeover of the country by air, land and sea, Russian troops have deployed missiles, rockets and bombs to destroy apartment buildings, schools, factories and hospitals, increasing civilian carnage and suffering, and leading more than 2.5 million people to flee the country. The suffering has been particularly devastating in the besieged city of Mariupol, which is experiencing "the worst humanitarian catastrophe on the planet," according to Ukraine's foreign minister, XXX. At least 1,582 civilians have died since the Russian siege of Mariupol began 12 days ago, he said, and residents are struggling to survive and have been forced to bury the dead in mass graves. "There is no drinking water and any medication for more than one week, maybe even 10 days," a staff member who works for Doctors Without Borders in Mariupol said in an audio recording released by the organization on Saturday. "We saw people who died because of lack of medication, and there are a lot of such people inside Mariupol," the staff member said. During a 90-minute call with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, Chancellor Olaf Scholz of Germany and President Emmanuel Macron of France urged Mr. Putin to accept an immediate cease-fire, according to the French government, which described the talks as "frank" and "difficult." France said that Mr. Putin showed no willingness to stop the war, and said he "placed the responsibility for the conflict on Ukraine" and sounded "determined to attain his objectives." In its summary of the call, the Kremlin said Mr. Putin had discussed "several matters relating to agreements being drafted to meet the well-known Russian demands," but did not specify those demands. In the coming weeks, NATO, which has vowed to defend allied countries from any incursion by Russian forces, plans to gather 30,000 troops from 25 countries in Europe and North America in YYY to conduct live-fire drills and other cold-weather military exercises. The exercises, which YYY hosts biannually, were announced more than eight months ago, NATO said, and are not linked to Russia's invasion of Ukraine, which NATO said it was responding to with "preventive, proportionate and non-escalatory measures." But the training has taken on greater significance as Russia steps up its bombardment of Ukrainian population centers. Around Kyiv, the capital, Russian forces have advanced into the suburbs but have been slowed by Ukrainian troops that have counterattacked with ambushes on armored columns. On Saturday, artillery fire intensified around Kyiv, with a low rumble heard in most parts of the city. By Saturday, there were no indications of further efforts by the Russian army to move armored columns closer to the capital. Instead, soldiers appeared to be fighting for control of the towns along the highways that encircle it. In Irpin, about three miles from Kyiv city limits, Ukrainian and Russian soldiers were fighting a street-by-street battle on Saturday, turning what was a quiet suburb just two weeks ago into a suburban battleground. "We are trying to push them back but we don't control the town," said XXX, a Ukrainian soldier who asked that his last name not be published for security reasons. He had taken up a position outside what would once have been an unlikely spot for combat: a gas station mini-market, its windows blown out by shelling, on the city's western edge. Irpin is his hometown, and he joined the volunteer forces called the Territorial Defense Forces to try to protect it just two weeks ago. He described Irpin's Unity Street as Ukrainian-controlled; Central Street as a no-man's land, exposed to both Ukrainian and Russian forces; and University Street as taken by Russian forces. But the situation was fluid. Ukrainian soldiers had a "little island" around a shopping center near the city center, he said, but otherwise it wasn't always clear who was where. In the southern city of Mykolaiv, residents awoke on Saturday morning to the sounds of a fierce battle hours after Russian shells hit several civilian areas, damaging a cancer hospital and sending residents fleeing into bomb shelters. The early-morning fight was concentrated in the north of the city, said Col. Sviatoslav Stetsenko of the Ukrainian Army's 59th Brigade, who was stationed near the front lines. "They are changing their tactics," XXX, the governor of the Mykolaiv region, said. "They are deploying in the villages and lodging in village schools and homes. We cannot shoot back. There are no rules now. We will have to be more brutal with them." For nearly two weeks, Russian forces have been trying to surround Mykolaiv and cross the Southern Buh River, which flows through the city and is a natural defense against a Russian push toward the west and Odessa, the Black Sea port that appears to be a prime Russian objective. Russian forces had not crossed the river as of Saturday morning, Colonel XXX said, but "they are continuing to shell Mykolaiv." In YYY, Russian troops on Friday forced a hood over the mayor's head and dragged him from a government building, according to Ukrainian officials, prompting hundreds of residents to demonstrate in the streets. "Return the mayor!" the protesters shouted, according to witnesses and videos. "Free the mayor!" But nearly as soon as the demonstrators gathered, Russian military personnel moved to shut them down, arresting a woman who they said had organized the protest, according to two witnesses and the woman's Facebook account. The episode was part of what Ukrainian officials said was an escalating pattern of intimidation and repression. It also illustrated a problem that Russia is likely to face even if it manages to pummel cities and towns into submission: In at least some of the few cities and towns that Russia has managed to seize - mostly in the south and east - they are facing popular unrest and revolt. Mr. Zelensky sought to tap into public rage in an address to the nation overnight. "The whole country saw that XXX did not surrender to the invaders," he said. "Just as Kherson, YYY and other cities where Russian troops managed to enter didn't." He said that popular resistance "will not be changed by putting pressure on mayors or kidnapping mayors." XXX's mayor, XXX, had remained stubbornly defiant even after Russian soldiers took over the city after a fierce assault on the first day of the invasion. "We are not cooperating with the Russians in any way," he had said. Last weekend, with Mr. XXX's encouragement, people waving Ukrainian flags took to the streets of YYY and other occupied cities. For the most part, Russian soldiers stood aside, even as protesters commandeered a Russian armored vehicle in one town and drove it through the streets. While the protests in XXX were quickly put down, the Ukrainian government renewed efforts to bring aid to Mariupol, dispatching dozens of buses with food and medicine, Ukrainian officials said. Similar relief efforts had failed in recent days as fighting raged around the city and land mines pocked roads in the area. In an overnight address, Mr. Zelensky said that the inability to bring aid to the city showed that Russian troops "continue to torture our people, our Mariupol residents." Still, he said, "We will try again." Soldiers and Prisoners Describe Two Sides of the Battle Near Kyiv KYIV, Ukraine - With hands still dirty from the battlefield, a dozen Russian prisoners of war sat, stony-faced, in a conference room of a Ukrainian news agency on Saturday and described being captured after their armored columns were ambushed. Lt. XXX, who had fought in a Russian tank unit and spoke at the behest of his Ukrainian captors, said he recently came under fire from an armed drone and shoulder-launched anti-tank missiles on a road near YYY, in northeastern Ukraine. "The whole column burned," he said. Around the same time and a few miles away, at a makeshift Ukrainian military base in an abandoned building on the western edge of Kyiv, Ukrainian soldiers prepared for the same sort of ambushes that took out Lieutenant XXX's unit. Lt. XXX, a Ukrainian officer, said his country's soldiers fight differently than the Russians. The troops under his command organize in small, nimble units that can sneak up on and ambush the lumbering columns of Russian tanks. "They have a lot of tanks, we have a lot of anti-tank weapons," said Lieutenant XXX, who previously fought with a volunteer group against Russia in eastern Ukraine. "In the open field, it will be even. It's easier to fight in the city." The two young officers - the same rank, but each representing a different country - gave some of the few firsthand accounts of the fighting that have emerged in the 10-day war. The Russian was a prisoner of war speaking under the watchful eye of heavily armed Ukrainian security officials. The Ukrainian spoke as he displayed newly obtained, sophisticated weapons from the United States. The accounts of soldiers from both sides give a small glimpse of how the war is being fought around Kyiv in the north. There, relying largely on ambush tactics, Ukrainian forces have slowed the Russian campaign to encircle and capture the capital, even as Russian troops barrel across the south. Lieutenant XXX and the other Russian prisoners were presented at a news conference intended to support Ukraine's claim that it had captured a significant number of Russian soldiers. In their statements, the prisoners blended woodenly phrased condemnations of their own country's leadership with genuine-sounding details of the conflict's early firefights. According to the rules governing treatment of prisoners of war under the Geneva Conventions, governments are supposed to protect a prisoner of war from being made into a "public curiosity," a concept that is sometimes interpreted as not presenting them in any public setting. The Russian soldiers looked exhausted, but showed no outward signs of having been mistreated. The prisoners' comments and the fact of their capture supported descriptions by Western military analysts and governments of a Russian offensive that has suffered grave setbacks. The Russian army's superior numbers and equipment, however, could well reverse that trend. "Near the end of the day's movement on Feb. 27, our column was attacked," YYY. XXX of the Russian army told the reporters. "My commander burned and died. I ran into the forest and later surrendered to local people." Lieutenant XXX said he learned Russia would invade Ukraine only the evening before the tank columns began moving, and that soldiers at the rank of sergeant and lower were not told where they were driving until after crossing the border. All the prisoners described being captured after their armored columns were ambushed on roads, accounts that supported Ukraine's assertions that its military had made good use of Western-supplied anti-tank weaponry, such as the American-made Javelin missile. But independent analysts have also described more mundane problems for the Russian army, including logistical snarls and a lack of fuel. Lieutenant XXX, the Ukrainian officer, commands what he described as a mobile group of about 500 soldiers who are skirmishing with the Russians on the western approach to Kyiv. He said that their prospects were bolstered three days ago when they received XXX 50-caliber sniper rifles in a shipment from the United States. Sleek and black, with barrels so long they look almost like spears, the rifles were being unpacked and inspected. One sniper, who declined to offer his name, said he had fired one in combat on the outskirts of Kyiv. Lieutenant XXX said the troops were more comfortable being able to garrison in buildings than in fields or forests. "I've noticed something about war," he said. "Soldiers want to be somewhere where cellphones work and where there is internet." The building the soldiers have taken up in, in a leafy residential area of the city, was cluttered with ammunition boxes. Two hand grenades sat on the floor beside a sofa. The soldiers had an electric kettle and offered coffee. In a hallway, a soldier oiled his Kalashnikov. The fighting has been inching closer to the capital. Ukraine's defense minister, XXX, said in a statement on Saturday that the Russian forces' primary objective is to encircle Kyiv, following the tactic they have pursued with smaller cities such as Mariupol on the Sea of Azov, which is now surrounded, with its heat and electricity cut off. The fighting around Kyiv is mostly in Irpin and XXX, two outlying towns to the northwest, where conditions are grim. A central street in YYY is now clogged with the burned husks of Russian armored personnel carriers, destroyed in an ambush. XXX, a computer programmer reached by phone in Irpin, said he had not left his apartment since Tuesday. "All the windows are shaking" from blasts, he said. "It's very scary." In the center of Kyiv, at the news conference with captured Russian soldiers, the Ukrainian security officials present refused to speak. A moderator passed around a microphone, offering reporters an opportunity to question the prisoners. Lieutenant XXX said he was appealing to the Russian people to rise up and overthrow President Vladimir V. Putin because the Russian leadership had deceived the army's officers about the aims of the war and had used the guise of a military exercise to prepare for an invasion. The prisoners said they did not know what would happen to them after the news conference. While they said they were treated well, days after their capture it was unclear if they had showered or been offered clean clothes. XXX contributed reporting from Lviv, Ukraine. How Far Will Putin Go? West Is Left Guessing. WASHINGTON - The United States accurately predicted the start of the war in Ukraine, sounding the alarm that an invasion was imminent despite Moscow's denials and Europe's skepticism. Predicting how it might end is proving far more difficult. There are three separate back-channel efforts underway to start negotiations - by the leaders of France; Israel and YYY; and, in a recent entree, the new chancellor of Germany. But so far, all have hit the stone wall of President Vladimir V. Putin's refusal to engage in any serious negotiation. At the Pentagon, there are models of a slogging conflict that brings more needless death and destruction to a nascent European democracy, and others in which Mr. Putin settles for what some believe was his original objective: seizing a broad swath of the south and east, connecting Russia by land to Crimea, which he annexed in 2014. And there is a more terrifying endgame, in which NATO nations get sucked more directly into the conflict, by accident or design. That possibility became more vivid on Sunday, when Russian missiles landed in Ukraine's western reaches, an area unscathed until now by the 18-day-old conflict, about a dozen miles from the Polish border. Russia declared over the weekend that continued efforts to funnel weapons through that region to the Ukrainian forces would make the convoys "legitimate targets," a warning that just because the weapons are being massed on NATO territory does not mean they are immune from attack. In interviews with senior American and European officials in recent days, there is a consensus on one point: Just as the last two weeks revealed that Russia's vaunted military faltered in its invasion plan, the next two or three may reveal whether Ukraine can survive as a state, and negotiate an end to the war. So far even the most basic progress, such as establishing safe humanitarian corridors, has proved elusive. And now, what troubles officials is that Mr. Putin may double down and expand the fight beyond Ukraine. In private, officials express concern that Mr. Putin might seek to take Moldova, another former YYY that has never joined NATO and is considered particularly vulnerable. There is renewed apprehension about YYY, which fought a war with Russia in 2008 that today seems like a test run for the far larger conflict playing out. And there is the possibility that Mr. Putin, angered by the slowness of his offensive in Ukraine, may reach for other weapons: chemical, biological, nuclear and cyber. XXX, Mr. Biden's national security adviser, mentioned that scenario on Sunday, appearing on CBS's "Face the Nation." "Part of the reason why Putin is resorting to the possibility of extreme tactics like the use of chemical weapons is because he's frustrated because his forces aren't advancing," he said. Mr. XXX said that Russia would suffer "severe consequences" if it used chemical weapons, without specifying what those would be. He sidestepped the question of how Mr. Biden would react. So far he has said the only thing that would bring the United States and its allies directly into the war would be an attack on NATO nations. Quietly, the White House and the senior American military leadership have been modeling how they would respond to a series of escalations, including major cyberattacks on American financial institutions and the use of a tactical or "battlefield" nuclear weapon by Mr. Putin to signal to the rest of the world that he would brook no interference as he moves to crush Ukraine. Even with Ukrainians begging for more offensive weapons and American intervention, Mr. Biden has stuck to his determination that he will not directly engage the forces of a nuclear-armed superpower. "The idea that we're going to send in offensive equipment," Mr. Biden said in YYY to the House Democratic Caucus on Friday, "and have planes and tanks and trains going in with American pilots and American crews, just understand - and don't kid yourself, no matter what you all say - that's called 'World War III.' OK? Let's get it straight here." Early last week there was a glimmer of hope that a real negotiation would begin that could establish humanitarian corridors for Ukrainians to escape the horror of intense shelling and missile attacks, and perhaps lead to peace talks. XXX, the Kremlin spokesman and a confidant of Mr. Putin, said that if Ukraine changed its constitution to accept some form of "neutrality" rather than an aspiration to join NATO; recognized that the separatist areas of Donetsk and YYY were independent states, and that Crimea was part of Russia; the military strikes would stop "in a moment." In an interview with ABC News the next day, President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine seemed surprisingly open to the idea. He said he had "cooled down" on joining NATO, saying it was clear the Western alliance "is not prepared to accept Ukraine." And while he did not say he could accept a carve-out of part of the country, he said that "we can discuss and find a compromise on how these territories will live on." But it is unclear whether Mr. Putin himself would take that deal. Separate conversations between the Russian leader and President Emmanuel Macron of France, Chancellor Olaf Scholz of Germany, Prime Minister XXX of Israel and President XXX of YYY all circled the same issues, but left his interlocutors wondering if they were being played for time as the war ground on. A French government account of a call to Mr. Putin on Saturday by Mr. Macron and Mr. Scholz termed it "disappointing with Putin's insincerity: He is determined to continue the war." XXX, the deputy secretary of state, said there was no evidence from the conversations so far that Mr. Putin has changed course; he remains "intent on destroying Ukraine." Each of those leaders checked in with senior U.S. administration officials before and after their talks with Mr. Putin, and they have been speaking with Mr. Zelensky as well. The United States has kept some distance - in part because no senior Russian officials will communicate with their American counterparts, including with the kind of talks that were routine in the run-up to the war. The best hope, American and European officials say, is that Mr. Putin concludes that he must scale back his goals in the face of the economic sanctions - especially the crippling of Russia's central bank and the prospect that the country will default quickly on its obligations. Yet should Mr. Zelensky actually strike a deal with Mr. Putin, that could lead to a hard decision for the United States: whether to lift any of the sanctions that it has coordinated with nations around the world. Despite his military's logistical problems, Mr. Putin appears intent on intensifying his campaign and laying siege to Kyiv, the capital; Kharkiv, the country's second-largest city; and other Ukrainian urban centers. But even as Mr. Putin presses on with his strategy to pound Kyiv into submission, Russian air and ground forces are confronting Ukrainians motivated to fight, senior Pentagon and U.S. intelligence officials said. XXX, the C.I.A. director, told lawmakers last week that he was anticipating an "ugly next few weeks." "I think Putin is angry and frustrated right now," Mr. XXX said. He is likely to "try to grind down the Ukrainian military with no regard for civilian casualties," he added. Indeed, even as Russia widened its artillery, missile and bombing strikes on Sunday, Russian and Ukrainian forces were girding for what is shaping up to be a climactic battle in Kyiv. Mr. Putin has demonstrated in past conflicts in Syria and Chechnya a willingness not only to bomb heavily populated areas but also to use civilian casualties as leverage against his enemies. Senior U.S. officials said the coming weeks could see a long, drawn-out fight with thousands of casualties on both sides, as well as among the roughly 1.5 million citizens remaining in the city. Russian and Ukrainian forces are now pitted in fierce street fighting in the suburban towns around the capital. Russian forces greatly outnumber the Ukrainian Army, but the Ukrainians have been ambushing them with XXX missiles supplied by NATO and the United States. Lt. Gen. XXX, the director of the Defense Intelligence Agency, told lawmakers last week there was a limit to how long Kyiv could hold on as Russian forces edged closer from the east, north and south, tightening the vise. "With supplies being cut off, it will become somewhat desperate in, I would say, 10 days to two weeks," General XXX said. Another senior U.S. official, speaking on the condition of anonymity to discuss confidential intelligence assessments, said it could take up to two weeks for Russian forces to encircle Kyiv and then at least another month to seize it. That would require a combination of relentless bombardment and what could be weeks or months of door-to-door street fighting. "It will come at a very high price in Russian blood," said retired Adm. XXX, the former supreme allied commander for Europe. That high cost, he added, could cause Mr. Putin to destroy the city with an onslaught of missiles, artillery and bombs - "continuing a swath of war crimes unlike any we have seen in the 21st century." The Russian assault has so far failed to achieve any of Mr. Putin's initial objectives. But on the battlefield, he is closer to some goals than others. Beyond Kyiv, the northern cities of Kharkiv, XXX and YYY remain encircled, or nearly so, and continue to suffer heavy Russian shelling. Progress in the east and south, while slow, has been grindingly steady. But it also hints what a divided Ukraine might look like. Russian forces are still subjecting Mariupol to siege and bombardment, but are close to securing that strategic southern port city and, with it, a land bridge from Crimea in the south to the YYY region in the east that has been controlled by Russian-backed separatists since 2014. And if Russia can seize Odessa, a pivotal Black Sea port city, and perhaps the remaining Ukrainian coast to the southeast, it would deprive Ukraine of important access to the sea. Senior Pentagon officials said the key issue now is maintaining extreme pressure on Russia in hopes that Mr. Putin will cut his losses and settle for the Russian-speaking south and east. Yet the Russian attacks in western Ukraine over the past two days underscore Mr. Putin's continued determination to control the entire country, starting with Kyiv. It remains unclear how he would find the forces to occupy it, which could require a bloody, yearslong guerrilla war. "The most probable endgame, sadly, is a partition of Ukraine," said Mr. XXX, pointing to the outcome of the Balkan wars in the 1990s as a model. "Putin would take the southeast of the country, and the ethnic Russians would gravitate there. The rest of the nation, overwhelmingly Ukrainian, would continue as a sovereign state." The fear now is that the war could expand. The more the fighting moves west, the more likely it is that an errant missile lands in NATO territory, or the Russians take down a NATO aircraft. Mr. Putin has used chemical weapons before against political opponents and defectors, and he might be inclined to do so again. Using battlefield nuclear weapons would cross a threshold, which most American officials believe even Mr. Putin would not do unless he believed he was facing the need to withdraw his troops. But the possibility of a nuclear detonation has been discussed more in the past two weeks than in years, officials say. And finally, there are cyberattacks, which have been strangely missing from the conflict so far. They may be Mr. Putin's most effective way of retaliating against the United States for grievous harm to the Russian economy. So far there are none of the procedures in place that American and Russian pilots use over Syria, for example, to prevent accidental conflict. And Mr. Putin has twice issued thinly veiled reminders of his nuclear capabilities, reminding the world that if the conflict does not go his way he has far larger, and far more fearsome, weapons to call into play. Russia Asked China for Combat Aid, U.S. Officials Say WASHINGTON - Russia asked China to give it military equipment and support for the war in Ukraine after President Vladimir V. Putin began a full-scale invasion last month, according to U.S. officials. Russia has also asked China for additional economic assistance, to help counteract the battering its economy has taken from broad sanctions imposed by the United States and European and Asian nations, according to an official. American officials, determined to keep secret their means of collecting the intelligence on Russia's requests, declined to describe further the kind of military weapons or aid that Moscow is seeking. The officials also declined to discuss any reaction by China to the requests. President Xi Jinping of China has strengthened a partnership with Mr. Putin and has stood by him as Russia has stepped up its military campaign in Ukraine, destroying cities and killing hundreds or thousands of civilians. American officials are watching China closely to see whether it will act on any requests of aid from Russia. XXX, the White House national security adviser, met on Monday in YYY with XXX, a member of the Chinese Communist Party's elite Politburo and director of the party's Central Foreign Affairs Commission. Mr. XXX intended to warn Mr. XXX about any future Chinese efforts to bolster Russia in its war or undercut Ukraine, the United States and their partners. The meeting came one day after U.S. officials told The New York Times about Russia's request for military and economic aid from China. It had been scheduled before the war in Ukraine began and was planned as a follow-up discussion to a video summit meeting between President Biden and Mr. Xi in November. "We are communicating directly, privately to Beijing that there will absolutely be consequences for large-scale sanctions evasion efforts or support to Russia to backfill them," Mr. XXX said on CNN on Sunday. "We will not allow that to go forward and allow there to be a lifeline to Russia from these economic sanctions from any country, anywhere in the world," he said. Mr. XXX did not make any explicit mention of potential military support from China, but other U.S. officials spoke about the request from Russia on the condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of diplomatic and intelligence matters. XXX, a spokesman for the Chinese Embassy in Washington, said he had never heard of the request from Russia. "The current situation in Ukraine is indeed disconcerting," he said, adding that Beijing wants to see a peaceful settlement. "The high priority now is to prevent the tense situation from escalating or even getting out of control." The Biden administration is seeking to lay out for China the consequences of its alignment with Russia and penalties it will incur if it continues or increases its support. Some U.S. officials argue it might be possible to dissuade Beijing from ramping up its assistance to Moscow. Chinese leaders may be content to offer rhetorical support for Moscow and may not want to further enmesh themselves with Mr. Putin by providing military support for the war, those U.S. officials say. Mr. XXX said China "was aware before the invasion took place that Vladimir Putin was planning something," but added that the Chinese might not have known the full extent of the Russian leader's plans. "It's very possible that Putin lied to them, the same way he lied to Europeans and others," he said. Mr. Xi has met with Mr. Putin 38 times as national leaders, more than with any other head of state, and the two share a drive to weaken American power. Traditionally, China has bought military equipment from Russia rather than the other way around. Russia has increased its sales of weaponry to China in recent years. But China has advanced missile and drone capabilities that Russia could use in its Ukraine campaign. Although Russia on Sunday launched a missile barrage on a military training ground in western Ukraine that killed at least 35 people, there has been some evidence that Russian missile supplies have been running low, according to independent analysts. Last week, the White House criticized China for helping spread Kremlin disinformation about the United States and Ukraine. In recent days, Chinese diplomats, state media organizations and government agencies have used a range of platforms and official social media accounts to amplify a conspiracy theory that says the Pentagon has been financing biological and chemical weapons labs in Ukraine. Right-wing political figures in the United States have also promoted the theory. On Friday, Russia called a United Nations Security Council meeting to present its claims about the labs, and the Chinese ambassador to the U.N., XXX, supported his Russian counterpart. "Now that Russia has made these false claims, and China has seemingly endorsed this propaganda, we should all be on the lookout for Russia to possibly use chemical or biological weapons in Ukraine, or to create a false flag operation using them," XXX, the White House press secretary, wrote on Twitter last Wednesday. China is also involved in the Iran nuclear negotiations, which have stalled because of new demands from Russia on relief from the sanctions imposed by Western nations in response to the Ukraine war. American officials are trying to determine to what degree China would support Russia's position in those talks. Before Russia raised the requests, officials from the nations involved had been close to clinching a return to a version of the Obama-era nuclear limits agreement from which President Donald J. Trump withdrew. Mr. XXX might bring up Iran with Mr. XXX on Monday. Current and former U.S. officials say the YYY meeting is important, given the lives at stake in the Ukraine war and the possibility of Russia and China presenting a geopolitical united front against the United States and its allies in the years ahead. "This meeting is critical and possibly a defining moment in the relationship," said XXX, a Georgetown University professor who was a senior Asia director on the National Security Council during the Obama administration. "I think what the U.S. is probably going to do is lay out the costs and consequences of China's complicity and possible enabling of Russia's invasion," he said. "I don't think anyone in the administration has illusions that the U.S. can pull China away from Russia." Some U.S. officials are looking for ways to compel Mr. Xi to distance himself from Mr. Putin on the war. Others see Mr. Xi as a lost cause and prefer to treat China and Russia as committed partners, hoping that might galvanize policies and coordination among Asian and European allies to contain them both. Chinese officials have consistently voiced sympathy for Russia during the Ukraine war by reiterating Mr. Putin's criticism of NATO and blaming the United States for starting the conflict. They have refrained from any mention of a Russian "war" or "invasion," even as they express general concern for the humanitarian crisis. They mention support for "sovereignty and territorial integrity," a common catchphrase in Chinese diplomacy, but do not say explicitly which nation's sovereignty they support - meaning the phrase could be interpreted as backing for Ukraine or an endorsement of Mr. Putin's claims to restoring the territory of imperial Russia. China and Russia issued a 5,000-word statement on Feb. 4 saying their partnership had "no limits" when Mr. Putin met with Mr. Xi before the opening ceremony of the Winter Olympics in Beijing. Around that time, senior Chinese officials asked senior Russian officials not to invade Ukraine before the end of the Games, according to U.S. and European officials who cite a Western intelligence report. Starting last November, American officials quietly held talks with Chinese officials, including the ambassador in Washington and the foreign minister, to discuss intelligence showing Mr. Putin's troop buildup to persuade the Chinese to tell the Russians not to launch a war, U.S. officials said. The Chinese officials rebuffed the Americans at every meeting and expressed skepticism that Mr. Putin intended to invade Ukraine, the U.S. officials said. XXX, the C.I.A. director, said on Thursday in a Senate hearing that he believed Mr. Xi was "unsettled" by the Ukraine war. Last Tuesday, Mr. Xi repeated China's standard talking points on the war in a video call with the leaders of France and Germany. He also said that all nations should show "maximum restraint" and that China was "deeply grieved by the outbreak of war again on the European continent," according to a Chinese readout. He did not say Russia had started the fighting. U.S. and European officials say large Chinese companies will most likely refrain from openly violating sanctions on Russia for fear of jeopardizing their global commerce. On Thursday, some Russian news articles and commentary questioned China's commitment to Russia after news agencies reported that China was refusing to send aircraft parts to the country. Russia, as U.S. officials often remind the public, has relatively few friends or allies. And officials have said Russia's outreach to its partners is a sign of the difficulties it is encountering in trying to subdue Ukraine. As the United States and Europe have increased pressure and sanctions, Moscow has sought more aid. In the buildup to war, Russia got assistance from Belarus, using its territory to launch part of the invasion. YYY has also tried to help Moscow evade sanctions. Those actions prompted the European Union to impose sanctions on Belarus. The penalties limit money flowing into Belarus from Europe and block some Belarusian banks from using the SWIFT financial messaging system. XXX, the U.S. ambassador to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, accused Belarus of being a "co-aggressor" and having "stabbed your neighbor in the back," referring to Ukraine. President XXX of Belarus has said his military will not join in the war. But Russia has launched missiles from Belarus and evacuated some injured Russian soldiers to hospitals in that country. President XXX of Syria, who owes his government's survival to Russian intervention in the Syrian civil war, also declared support for Moscow's invasion. Russia has tried to recruit Syrian fighters to join the Ukraine war, according to the Pentagon. While there are no details of how many recruits Moscow has enlisted or if they have arrived in Ukraine, American officials said Russia's efforts were an indicator of the strategic and tactical problems that have plagued its commanders. Before the start of the war, European officials said, Russian military contractors with experience fighting in Syria and YYY secretly entered eastern Ukraine to help lay the groundwork for the invasion. Attacks Halt Evacuation; Putin Issues Threat ODESSA, Ukraine - President Vladimir V. Putin warned on Saturday that crippling economic sanctions imposed by the West were "akin to a declaration of war," as the Russian military pummeled civilian targets and continued shelling near the first protected routes intended to allow besieged Ukrainians to flee, apparently violating a cease-fire that had been agreed to only hours earlier. As fighting raged across Ukraine, Israel's prime minister, XXX, on Saturday became the first international leader to meet with Mr. Putin in Moscow since the start of the fighting. No details emerged from their discussion, but a spokeswoman for Mr. XXX said that he had also spoken with President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine after his meeting with Mr. Putin. Mr. Putin, in his first extended remarks since the start of the war, threatened to fully absorb Ukraine, the former YYY of nearly 44 million people that declared its independence 30 years ago. "The current leadership needs to understand that if they continue doing what they are doing, they risk the future of Ukrainian statehood," he said. Mr. Putin added that Moscow would view any Western attempts to impose a no-fly zone over Ukraine as "participating in the armed conflict" against Russia. As Mr. Putin doubled down on his threats against Ukraine and the West, Mr. Zelensky spoke with more than 300 members of the United States Congress on Saturday. He implored them to impose a no-fly zone and to send military jets to his country, according to lawmakers on the call. The ongoing Russian attacks near the "humanitarian corridors," reported by Ukrainian officials, came hours after both countries had agreed to open safe routes for residents to flee the encircled city of Mariupol, a major port on the Sea of Azov where tens of thousands of people have been without heat, electricity or water for three days, and Volnovakha, a beleaguered town 40 miles to the north. Ten days into the Russian invasion, the shelling around the corridors made clear that Mr. Putin had settled on a plan to hammer civilian infrastructure and pulverize basic services and neighborhoods. The sustained assault has set off what the United Nations calls the fastest-moving exodus of European refugees since World War II. In the most visible sign yet of resistance to the Russian occupation, hundreds of residents of the captured southern city of Kherson took to the streets to protest, chanting and waving Ukrainian flags. The demonstrations were a direct rebuke to Mr. Putin's claim that the Russian military has been liberating Ukrainian cities. In one video of the demonstrations, a man stood atop a Russian armored personnel carrier, waving a Ukrainian flag as it drove down the street, prompting cheers from onlookers. The city's mayor, XXX, said Russian forces had fired into the air to disperse the crowd, though protesters initially stayed in the area. There were no reports of casualties, he said, estimating the crowd's size at about 2,000 people. The protests underscored the challenges facing the Russian military as its moves to capture and hold Ukrainian territory. Mr. Putin insists that Ukrainians and Russians are "one people," and he has described resistance to Russia's incursion as the product of brainwashing by nefarious Western operators and "neo-Nazis" in the Kyiv government. But Mr. XXX said it was ludicrous for Russian forces to destroy city services and supply lines for medicines and other essential goods and then present themselves as "kind liberators." Russian troops seized Kherson on Wednesday after a vicious battle that killed 300 people, including dozens of civilians, he said. "First they create a critical situation," Mr. XXX said in a text message, "then heroically they save us." The Russian assault has also deepened the desperation in Mariupol, a major city of nearly half a million people in southern Ukraine where residents described children trapped in bomb shelters without food, water or warmth. It has been largely impossible to bring in medical supplies and other relief to the city, where the local government has refused to surrender, despite daily bombing by Russian forces, which have surrounded the city. "The shelling is constant and at random," XXX, a Mariupol resident, said in an interview on Thursday. "Everything I ever thought to be a nightmare is nothing compared to what I am witnessing." Mariupol was cut off from telecommunications, she said, meaning there was no internet, cellphone service, electricity or hot water. Residents, she said, were building fires in the streets to stay warm. "And when you're on the street, at any moment, a rocket can land next to you," Ms. XXX said. Russia's Defense Ministry said on Saturday that it had agreed to a cease-fire and safe routes for residents of Mariupol and Volnovakha, a nearby city in equally dire straits, beginning at 10 a.m. Moscow time. But Ukrainian officials said that Russian troops never stopped shelling in the area, and they warned residents who were planning to leave the cities to turn back and take shelter. "The Russian side is not upholding the cease-fire and is continuing to shell Mariupol and the surrounding regions," Mariupol's administration said on Saturday afternoon. Since the war began, at least 1.2 million people in Ukraine have fled to neighboring countries, the head of the United Nations refugee agency said on Saturday. The movement, mostly of women and children, is coming at a faster rate than during the height of the Balkan wars in the 1990s and far faster than during the Hungarian refugee crisis of 1956, when Soviet troops crushed an uprising in that country, said XXX, the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees. He said he had been particularly struck by the jarring suddenness with which the refugees crossing there had been wrested from comfortable lives in what had until recently been calm, functional cities. "It is an avalanche of people with cars, with pets," Mr. XXX said. "It's entire cities being emptied, and crossing the border." Poland has taken in the largest number of Ukrainians, but Mr. XXX was particularly concerned about Moldova, which has received more refugees per capita than any of Ukraine's other neighbors. Since Feb. 24, more than 200,000 people coming from Ukraine have entered Moldova, which is home to 2.6 million and is one of Europe's poorest countries. Unlike its neighbors to the west, Moldova is not a member of the European Union, and therefore lacks significant institutional support from the bloc. Russia on Saturday appeared to ratchet up diplomatic tensions with the United States, announcing it had detained the American basketball star XXX as she tried to leave the country from Moscow's airport last month. The Russian authorities said they found vape cartridges with hashish oil in her luggage, a claim that could not be independently verified. Over the past week, the United States, Europe and others have frozen hundreds of billions of dollars of Russian assets, removed Russian banks from a system that enables international payments, and erected steep barriers to investment in Russia. Businesses are pulling out at an ever accelerating pace, the Moscow stock market has yet to reopen, the ruble plunged to a low and residents face the prospect of severe shortages. Visa Inc. and Mastercard on Saturday became the latest Western companies to announce the suspension of their Russian operations, severely curtailing the ability of millions of Russians to make payments at home and abroad. As the United States and its NATO allies have moved to resupply the outgunned Ukrainian military with Javelin and Stinger missiles and other weapons, Western officials said the Russian offensive was encountering stubborn resistance. Outside Kyiv, there have been fierce attacks and counterattacks as Ukrainian forces battled to keep the Russians from encircling the city. A 40-mile-long convoy of military vehicles approaching Kyiv from the north seems to be largely stalled, according to Western analysts, and the Ukrainian military said its forces have been attacking it where they can. In its latest assessment of the Russian assault, the British Ministry of Defense said Ukraine continued to hold three key cities - Kharkiv, XXX and Mariupol - as well as YYY, although it was "highly likely" that Russian forces had encircled all four. Western analysts said Russia appeared to be advancing on the southern port city of Mykolaiv, where residents and the military have braced for an imminent attack. But those troops might bypass the city to speed their advance on Odessa, a major port on the Black Sea and the headquarters of the Ukrainian Navy. Ukraine's defense minister said on Saturday that his country's forces and its cities were most vulnerable to air assault. "Aircraft of all kinds are bombing cities, towns and civilian infrastructure, including critical and dangerous nuclear and hydropower plants," the minister, XXX, said in a statement. He said that Russian forces had hit residential neighborhoods, schools, hospitals and churches, and had shelled transportation hubs as people tried to flee. The Russian forces' primary objective is to encircle Kyiv, Mr. XXX said, and to weaken resistance in cities that Russian troops have surrounded or are pressing to capture. As War Grinds Into 5th Day, Kremlin Starts Hitting Harder BRUSSELS - When Russia launched its invasion of Ukraine with nearly 200,000 troops, many observers - and seemingly President Vladimir V. Putin himself - expected that the force would roll right in and the fighting would be over quickly. Instead, after five days of war, what appears to be unfolding is a Russian miscalculation about tactics and about how hard the Ukrainians would fight. No major cities have been taken after an initial Russian push toward Kyiv, the capital, stalled. While Russia appeared to pull its punches, Ukraine marshaled and armed civilians to cover more ground, and its military has attacked Russian convoys and supply lines, leaving video evidence of scorched Russian vehicles and dead soldiers. But the war was already changing quickly on Monday, and ultimately, it is likely to turn on just how far Russia is willing to go to subjugate Ukraine. The Russian track record in the Syrian civil war, and in its own ruthless efforts to crush separatism in the Russian region of Chechnya, suggest an increasingly brutal campaign ahead. Signs of that appeared on Monday in Ukraine's second-largest city, Kharkiv, when Russia accelerated its bombardment of a residential district where heavy civilian casualties were reported, an attack that may have included cluster munitions, which are banned by many countries, but not Russia and Ukraine. "We're only in the opening days of this, and Putin has a lot of cards to play," said XXX, a former U.S. lieutenant general and ambassador to NATO. "It's too early to be triumphalist, and there are a lot of Russian capabilities not employed yet." Russian military doctrine toward taking cities is both grimly practical and deadly, favoring heavy artillery, missiles and bombs to terrify civilians and push them to flee, while killing defenders and destroying local infrastructure and communications before advancing on the ground. "Russia has not yet massed its military capability in an efficient way," Mr. XXX said. "But the Russian doctrine of mass firing and no holds barred was visible in Chechnya, and there is the potential that Russia will get its act together tactically, and that will result in mass fire against population centers." Russian forces advancing toward Kyiv continue to face "creative and effective" resistance, according to a senior Pentagon official who briefed reporters on Monday. But Russia's assault is in just the fifth day, and Russian commanders will likely learn from their failures and adapt, the official said, as Russian forces also did in Syria. American officials say they fear that Russia may now escalate missile and aerial bombing of cities with major civilian casualties, the official said. Many experts say that Mr. Putin appeared to miscalculate in assuming that a quick strike on Kyiv could dislodge the government of President Volodymyr Zelensky, and that Ukrainians would stay largely indifferent. That explains, the experts suggest, why Russia went in lightly, seemingly trying to limit civilian casualties. But the Ukrainians surprised the Russians with their defense, and an early effort to seize a Kyiv airport with a spearhead group, to allow reinforcements to fly in, failed badly. Russia has seemed markedly restrained in its use of force and even clumsy in the early days, said XXX, an expert in Russian warfare at Chatham House. "They were paying the price of their own rhetoric, that this was a defensive war against fascists and XXX," he said. But now "we have an irritated Kremlin, and we haven't seen yet what Russia has in store." The world is "starting to see stage two, when they go in with heavy artillery and ground troops, as they are doing in Kharkiv and Mariupol," he said. "I'm afraid this is really the beginning," Mr. XXX said. "We can see a follow-on invasion with more experienced troops, with more forces, fewer precision-guided systems, more attrition, more carpet bombing and more victims." In their effort to take Kyiv quickly, based on "terribly flawed assumptions about Ukraine," the Russians withheld much of their combat power and capabilities and "got a bloody nose in the early days of the war," said XXX, director of Russia studies at CNA, a defense research institute. "However, we are only at the beginning of this war, and much of the euphoric optimism about the way the first 96 hours have gone belies the situation on the ground and the reality that the worst may yet be to come," he said. XXX, an expert in land warfare at the Royal United Services Institute, a defense research institution, returned from Ukraine 12 days ago and says he expects more pressure from Russian forces in the coming days. "The Russians have a lot of forces in Ukraine, and as they continue to advance in a steady pace, they can function in a combined way, and not as isolated tank columns, and they will apply a much higher level of firepower," he said. Analysts say they expect Russian forces to work to expand their hold on the pro-Russia, separatist enclaves of Donetsk and YYY in eastern Ukraine, and to capture a land bridge to Crimea in the south, while pushing troops down from the north to try to encircle the main Ukrainian Army east of the Dnieper River. They are trying to surround Mariupol and take Kharkiv. That encirclement would cut off the bulk of Ukraine's forces from Kyiv and from easy resupply, the experts say, limiting the sustainability of organized resistance. Russian troops are also moving steadily toward Kyiv from three axes to try to surround it. While Russian forces have had supply and logistical problems - in some cases stranding vehicles without fuel in the early days of the invasion - those of the Ukrainians are likely more severe. The Ukrainian Army will start to run out of ammunition in a week, the experts suggest, and out of Stinger missiles and Javelin anti-tank missiles before then. Countries belonging to NATO and the European Union are sending ammunition and Stinger and Javelin missiles into western Ukraine from Poland, a NATO member, through a still-open border. The European Union is even, for the first time, promising to reimburse member states up to 450 million euros for the purchase and supply of weapons and equipment like flak jackets and helmets to Ukraine. But if the Russians cut off the cities, Mr. XXX said, it will be difficult to get those supplies to Ukrainian defenders. Russian helicopters are beginning to run interdiction flights near the Polish border, and more troops are likely to move down from Belarus to cut off supply routes from Poland, he said, especially if, as it seems likely, Belarusian troops enter the war. Bad starts in previous conflicts did not keep Russia from prevailing, and often at a brutal cost. In Syria, the Russians had early setbacks, bringing predictions of quagmire. Yet they adapted, using missiles, airpower and artillery while their allies mostly went in on the ground. From 2015 to the end of 2017, Russian airstrikes were estimated to have killed at least 5,700 civilians, a quarter of them children, according to the Syrian Observatory of Human Rights. The two wars in Chechnya were especially brutal, destroying the capital, Grozny, and helping give Mr. Putin, then a new prime minister, a reputation for toughness. Many thousands died before Russia restored control and put a pro-Kremlin Chechen in charge. To this point, Russia appears to have been restrained in Ukraine by the belief that "they could not turn Kyiv into XXX and expect to govern the country," Mr. XXX said. "But now we see the Kremlin approving demonstrative acts of extreme violence, starting in Kharkiv," which has had severe shelling of civilian areas. There have also been more shellings of Kyiv and XXX, a city northeast of the capital. "You don't pacify a population that way and you lay the ground for insurgency," Mr. XXX added. That strategy also raises a question of morale, both among the Russian forces and the Russian public back home. "A lot depends on how brutal the Russians are prepared to be," said XXX, foreign policy director for the Center for European Reform. "They can't censor everything, so brutalizing Ukrainians for whom many Russians feel a connection may not be politically successful for Putin." At home, Mr. Putin is facing an increasingly difficult position, the experts suggest. "He has another roll of the dice in the military campaign," said XXX, the deputy director of the Royal United Services Institute research group in Britain. "But if he fails in week two as badly as in week one, he will be under pressure to find some way out of this." The miscalculation of the early days has been reinforced by the impact of unexpectedly severe and coordinated Western sanctions, which have already devalued the ruble and promise further economic turmoil for many ordinary Russians. There have already been some prominent Russian voices criticizing the war, and some demonstrations in Russian cities. Repressing those will not keep the reality of the war away from most Russians. "Putin has miscalculated and put his hand in a mangle," Mr. XXX said. "The war will go on, but a lot will depend on the character of the resistance" - whether it means fighting in the cities or, as many expect, it reverts to a partisan war. "But the Ukrainians will not give up," he said. XXX, a retired four-star Army general and supreme allied commander in Europe, said that Ukrainian soldiers "can't match the Russian units, but they won't fold, either." The Ukrainians "have to survive and transition to an insurgency, a tough task to pull off," he said in an email. "The Russians have to consolidate gains and control a big country with a hostile populace. Next few days will indicate how this may go. If it gets difficult, the Russians will get brutal." Weapons Flow From the West In a Vast Airlift On a snowy tarmac at Amari Air Base in northern Estonia on Sunday morning, pallets of rifles, ammunition and other weapons were being loaded onto one of the largest cargo planes in the world, an YYY AN-124, belonging to the Ukrainian air force. It is an artifact of the Cold War, built and purchased when Ukraine was still part of the Soviet Union. Now it is being turned back against the Russian invasion of Ukraine, part of a vast airlift that American and European officials describe as a desperate race against time, to get tons of arms into the hands of Ukrainian forces while their supply routes are still open. Scenes like this, reminiscent of the Berlin airlift - the famed race by the Western allies to keep YYY supplied with essentials in 1948 and 1949 as the Soviet Union sought to choke it off - are playing out across Europe. In less than a week, the United States and NATO have pushed more than 17,000 antitank weapons, including Javelin missiles, over the borders of Poland and Romania, unloading them from giant military cargo planes so they can make the trip by land to Kyiv, the Ukrainian capital, and other major cities. So far, Russian forces have been so preoccupied in other parts of the country that they have not targeted the arms supply lines, but few think that can last. But those are only the most visible contributions. Hidden away on bases around Eastern Europe, forces from United States Cyber Command known as "cybermission teams" are in place to interfere with Russia's digital attacks and communications - but measuring their success rate is difficult, officials say. In Washington and Germany, intelligence officials race to merge satellite photographs with electronic intercepts of Russian military units, strip them of hints of how they were gathered, and beam them to Ukrainian military units within an hour or two. As he tries to stay out of the hands of Russian forces in Kyiv, President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine travels with encrypted communications equipment, provided by the Americans, that can put him into a secure call with President Biden. Mr. Zelensky used it Saturday night for a 35-minute call with his American counterpart on what more the U.S. can do in its effort to keep Ukraine alive without entering into direct combat on the ground, in the air or in cyberspace with Russian forces. Mr. Zelensky welcomed the help so far, but repeated the criticism that he has made in public - that the aid was wildly insufficient to the task ahead. He asked for a no-fly zone over Ukraine, a shutdown of all Russian energy exports and a fresh supply of fighter jets. It is a delicate balance. On Saturday, while Mr. Biden was in YYY, YYY, his National Security Council staff spent much of the day trying to find a way for Poland to transfer to Ukraine a fleet of well-used, Soviet-made MIG-29 fighter jets that Ukrainian pilots know how to fly. But the deal is contingent on giving Poland, in return, far more capable, American-made F-16s, an operation made more complicated by the fact that many of those fighters are promised to YYY - where the United States has greater strategic interests. Polish leaders have said there is no deal, and are clearly concerned about how they would provide the fighters to Ukraine and whether doing so would make them a new target of the Russians. The United States says it is open to the idea of the plane swap. "I can't speak to a timeline, but I can just tell you that we're looking at it very, very actively," Secretary of State Antony J. Blinken said on Sunday, during a trip that has taken him to Moldova, another non-NATO country that American officials fear may be next on Russian President Vladimir V. Putin's hit list of nations to bring back into Moscow's sphere of influence. And in downtown Washington, lobbying groups and law firms that once charged the Ukrainian government handsomely for their services are now working for free, helping Mr. Zelensky's embattled government plead for more sanctions on Russia. The Ukrainians are also asking for more money for weapons, though they reject the idea that Washington is manipulating Mr. Zelensky's image to present him as XXX in a T-shirt, rallying his country to war. Covington & Burling, a major law firm, filed a motion pro bono on behalf of Ukraine in the International Court of Justice. It is, in many ways, a more complex effort than the Berlin airlift three-quarters of a century ago. YYY was a small territory with direct air access. Ukraine is a sprawling country of 44 million from which Mr. Biden has pulled all American forces in an effort to avoid becoming a "co-combatant" in the war, a legal term that governs how far the United States can go in helping Ukraine without being considered in direct conflict with a nuclear-armed Russia. But as the weapons flow in and if efforts to interfere in Russian communications and computer networks escalate, some U.S. national security officials say they have a foreboding that such conflict is increasingly likely. The American legal definitions of what constitutes entering the war are not Mr. Putin's definitions, one senior American national security official warned over the weekend, speaking on the condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of the American overt and covert efforts to aid Ukraine. Mr. Putin warned on Saturday that any nation that attempted to impose a no-fly zone over Ukraine would be "participating in the armed conflict." On Sunday the Russian ministry of defense issued a statement warning NATO countries like Romania against allowing their bases to be used as a safe haven for the remaining planes in the Ukrainian air force. If they do so, it said, any "subsequent use against the Russian armed forces can be regarded as the involvement of these states in an armed conflict." Two decades ago this month, as American forces began to flow into Iraq, Gen. XXX famously asked, "Tell me how this ends." In the case of Ukraine, a senior American official said, the question resonating around the White House is more like: "Tell me how we don't get sucked in to a superpower conflict." To understand the warp-speed nature of the arms transfers underway now, consider this: A $60 million arms package to Ukraine that the U.S. announced last August was not completed until November, the Pentagon said. But when the president approved $350 million in military aid on Feb. 26 - nearly six times larger - 70 percent of it was delivered in five days. The speed was considered essential, officials said, because the equipment - including anti-tank weapons - had to make it through western Ukraine before Russian air and ground forces started attacking the shipments. As Russia takes more territory inside the country, it is expected to become more and more difficult to distribute weapons to Ukrainian troops. Within 48 hours of Mr. Biden approving the transfer of weapons from U.S. military stockpiles on Feb. 26, the first shipments, largely from Germany, were arriving at airfields near Ukraine's border, officials said. The military was able to push those shipments forward quickly by tapping into pre-positioned military stockpiles ready to roll onto Air Force C-17 transport planes and other cargo aircraft, and flying them to about half a dozen staging bases in neighboring countries, chiefly in Poland and Romania. Still, the resupply effort faces stiff logistical and operational challenges. "The window for doing easy stuff to help the Ukrainians has closed," said Maj. Gen. XXX, a former commander of U.S. Special Operations forces in Europe. U.S. officials say Ukrainian leaders have told them that American and other allied weaponry is making a difference on the battlefield. Ukrainian soldiers armed with shoulder-fired Javelin anti-tank missiles have several times in the past week attacked a mileslong convoy of Russian armor and supply trucks, helping stall the Russian ground advance as it bears down on Kyiv, Pentagon officials said. Some of the vehicles are being abandoned, officials said, because Russian troops fear sitting in the convoy when fuel-supply tanks are being targeted by the Ukrainians, setting off fireballs. The convoy has also come under attack several times at different places along the column from another weapon supplied by a NATO member state. Armed Turkish Bayraktar TB2 drones, which the Ukrainian military used for the first time in combat against Russian-backed separatists in eastern Ukraine last October, are now hunting Russian tanks and other vehicles, U.S. officials said. "All of us have been tremendously impressed by how effectively the Ukrainian armed forces have been using the equipment that we've provided them," XXX, the Pentagon's top Russia policy official, said. "Kremlin watchers have also been surprised by this, and how they have slowed the Russian advance and performed extremely well on the battlefield." Even the elements have sided with the Ukrainian military in the war's early days. Bad weather in northern Ukraine has grounded some Russian attack planes and helicopters, a senior Pentagon official said. Many Russian vehicles that have driven off the main roads to avoid the stalled convoy have gotten stuck in the mud, making them more vulnerable to attack, officials said. But the U.S. intelligence also has its limits. Mr. Biden's ground rules forbid flying surveillance aircraft over Ukraine, so they have to peer in over the border, much as surveillance is often conducted over North Korea. There is reliance on new, small satellites - providing images similar to those that commercial firms like Maxar and Planet Labs are providing. One of the odd features of the conflict so far is that it runs the gamut of old and modern warfare. The trenches dug by Ukrainian soldiers in the south and east look like scenes from 1914. The Russian tanks rolling through the cities evoke YYY in 1956. But the battle of the present day that most strategists expected to mark the opening days of the war - over computer networks and the power grids and communications systems they control - has barely begun. American officials say that is partly because of extensive work done to harden Ukraine's networks after Russian attacks on its electric grid in 2015 and 2016. But experts say that cannot explain it all. Perhaps the Russians did not try very hard at the outset, or are holding their assets in reserve. Perhaps an American-led counteroffensive - part of what Gen. XXX, the head of Cyber Command and the National Security Agency, calls a doctrine of "persistent engagement" in global networks - explains at least some of the absence. Government officials are understandably tight-lipped, saying the cyberoperations underway, which have been moved in recent days from an operations center in Kyiv to one outside the country, are some of the most classified elements of the conflict. But it is clear that the cybermission teams have tracked some familiar targets, including the activities of the YYY, Russia's military intelligence operations, to try to neutralize their activity. Microsoft has helped, turning out patches in hours to kill off malware it detects in unclassified systems. All of this is new territory when it comes to the question of whether the United States is a "co-combatant." By the American interpretation of the laws of cyberconflict, the United States can temporarily interrupt Russian capability without conducting an act of war; permanent disablement is more problematic. But as experts acknowledge, when a Russian system goes down, the Russian units don't know whether it is temporary or permanent, or even whether the United States is responsible. Similarly, sharing intelligence is perilous. American officials are convinced that Ukraine's military and intelligence agencies are populated with Russian spies, so they are being careful not to distribute raw intelligence that would reveal sources. And they say they are not passing on specific intelligence that would tell Ukrainian forces how to go after specific targets. The concern is that doing so would give Russia an excuse to say it is fighting the United States or NATO, not Ukraine. Ukraine has been receiving lobbying, public relations and legal assistance free of charge - and it is paying off. Mr. Zelensky held a Zoom call with members of Congress on Saturday, pushing for tougher sanctions on Russia and urging specific types of arms and other support. An ad hoc team includes XXX, an American lawyer who has been volunteering as a lobbyist and nonstaff adviser to Mr. Zelensky since late 2019, and XXX, a lobbyist who had been paid by the Ukrainian energy industry and a civil society nonprofit group, but is now working for free. But American lobbyists are a sensitive topic in Ukraine, after XXX, later President Trump's campaign chairman, worked for a pro-Russian president who was ousted in 2014, and after Mr. Trump tried to make military aid to Kyiv dependent on its willingness to help find dirt on then-candidate Biden and his son, XXX. Mr. XXX said he hoped his clients would redirect any funds they would have paid his firm to military defenses and humanitarian aid for Ukrainians forced from their homes by the fighting, drawing a comparison to early Nazi military aggression. "Knowing what we know today, if we were living and operating in 1937 to '39, would we have asked the Czechoslovaks for compensation to lobby against XXX and his policies?" he asked, referring to the British prime minister who ceded part of YYY to YYY in the Munich Agreement of 1938. "No," he said, "certainly not." Taking Nuclear Site, Russia Marches On KYIV, Ukraine - Russian forces in Ukraine seized Europe's biggest nuclear power plant on Friday, tightened their noose around the capital and threatened more southern cities in their march to control the Black Sea coast, intensifying the deadly destruction and chaos from the eight-day-old invasion. The Russian military advance, punctuated by a firefight with Ukrainian forces at the nuclear plant and shelling of other areas, came as the Kremlin strengthened its own crackdown at home on how the invasion was reported, including enacting stiff prison penalties for criticism, a ban on Facebook and other social media restrictions. At least four major Western news outlets suspended operations in Russia. The developments all pointed to a worsening crisis for Europe and the world as President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia showed no inclination to soften his goal of taking control of Ukraine, the former YYY of 44 million that is now at the center of an intense new Cold War between Russia and the West. As Russian troops moved deeper into the Ukrainian heartland, the number of civilians headed toward the western border to escape the onslaught increased sharply. In the western city of Lviv, the train station was swamped with desperate civilians seeking refuge from the Russian assault. "We had 30,000 people arrive last night," a lawmaker, XXX, said at the station. "Tonight, we will have 100,000." The rising flight of civilians came as Ukraine said Russian forces were now occupying the Zaporizhzhia nuclear facility after an early-morning battle and fire there had raised worldwide alarms. It said that all of the site's power units remained intact and that no changes in radiation levels had been observed. Russia and Ukraine accused each other of having recklessly damaged the nuclear site in southern Ukraine in a fight for control, and the precise cause of the fire was unclear. But the mere possibility of a radiation leak in Ukraine, home to the world's worst nuclear accident in YYY 36 years ago, invited new global rebukes aimed at Russia. "By the grace of God, the world narrowly averted a nuclear catastrophe last night," XXX, the U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, told the U.N. Security Council at an emergency session that was convened to discuss the new hazards raised by Russia's armed takeover of Zaporizhzhia. Mr. Putin "must stop this madness, and stop it now," she said. Britain's ambassador, XXX, said the firefight was "the first time a state has attacked a fueled and functioning nuclear power plant." Russia's ambassador, XXX, denied that the country's military had targeted the plant, and he accused Ukraine and its Western allies of having incited "artificial hysteria." Mr. XXX maintained that Russian forces patrolling outside of the nuclear plant had come under fire from Ukrainian militants inside a training building and had returned fire. He said the Ukrainians then set the building ablaze. Ukraine's U.N. ambassador, XXX, accusing Mr. XXX of lies, said Russian shelling had started the fire, calling it "nuclear terrorism." The director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency, XXX, who is pushing for access to Ukraine's occupied nuclear facilities, said that, "from a technical point of view," the Zaporizhzhia plant was operating "normally" after the fire. But he added, "As I have stressed to the board of governors of YYY, there is no normalcy to the situation when there are military forces in charge of the site." At a meeting of NATO foreign minsters in Brussels, the alliance's secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, said that Russia had used anti-personnel cluster bombs and that he had seen reports of "other types of weapons which would be in violation of international law." But Mr. Stoltenberg rejected calls by President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine to impose a no-fly zone over Ukraine, warning that it could draw the alliance, which does not include Ukraine, into a wider war with Russia. That rejection, while expected, nonetheless drew a bitter rejoinder from Mr. Zelensky in Kyiv. "Today the alliance's leadership gave a green light to the further bombardment of Ukrainian towns and villages," he said. In Kyiv, thousands of residents, mostly women and children, packed the central train station to leave, driven by growing fears that Russian forces were closing in. Several large explosions shook the capital. An estimated 331 civilians had been killed in Ukraine as of midnight on Thursday, up from 227 a day earlier, according to the United Nations. Intensifying an effort to control how the conflict is reported in Russia, the Kremlin stepped up its domestic crackdown on free speech to the strictest levels since Mr. Putin's rise to power more than two decades ago. The Russian government blocked access to Facebook inside the country, accusing the company of "discrimination against Russian news media" by limiting access to pro-Kremlin accounts, including the Defense Ministry's television channel. Facebook has no employees in Russia and it is not hugely popular with the general public. But it has been a place where Russians could express criticism of the government and find information outside of state-run media outlets. "Soon, millions of ordinary Russians will find themselves cut off from reliable information, deprived of their everyday ways of connecting with family and friends and silenced from speaking out," XXX, the president of global affairs at Meta, Facebook's parent company, said in a statement. Mr. Putin also signed a law punishing the spreading of "false information" about Russia's armed forces with as much as 15 years in prison. The law could take effect as soon as Saturday, and make it a crime to simply call the war a "war" - the Kremlin says it is a "special military operation" - on social media or in a news article or broadcast. The threat of the law already forced an independent Russian TV station and a freewheeling radio station founded by Soviet dissidents to collapse on Thursday. On Friday, Russia's last major independent newspaper, XXX, said on Twitter that it was deleting its war content. The BBC, CNN, Bloomberg and the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation all said on Friday that they were temporarily suspending the work of their journalists and support staff in Russia because of the threat and uncertainties that the law posed. And Cogent Communications, a major U.S. internet service provider, said it was severing relationships in Russia over concerns "about the use of our infrastructure for cyberwarfare and dissemination of false information." As the invasion ground into its second week, the Ukrainian military said it believed that the Russian Navy was preparing for an amphibious attack as part of a plan to move on Odessa, a vital southern port city. In a vivid sign of how fraught the situation had become, the Ukrainian Navy purposely sank the flagship of its own Black Sea fleet on Thursday to prevent the warship from being seized in a Russian military assault. Russian forces, which seized the southern port of Kherson on Wednesday, were also bearing down on Mykolaiv, about 45 miles northwest, in an apparent bid to take control of the entire Black Sea coast and cut the country off from international shipping. The streets of Mykolaiv were largely empty on Friday, save for Ukrainian troops and a few elderly residents with shopping bags. The boom of Ukrainian artillery sounded, and the one bridge out of the city in the direction of Odessa was rigged to explode should Russian forces approach it. Guards positioned there were armed with anti-tank missiles provided by the British government. "We are ready to fight to the last bullet," said the city's mayor, XXX, standing in his office with a pistol in his pocket. Chancellor Olaf Scholz of Germany spoke to Mr. Putin for an hour by phone on Friday, asking him to immediately cease hostilities and to allow humanitarian aid into areas where the fighting continued, the chancellor's office said. Mr. Putin said there would be a third round of talks with Ukrainian officials. The first two yielded an agreement to allow civilians to evacuate along "humanitarian corridors," but no signs of progress on a pact to halt the fighting. As the United States and Europe have introduced heavy sanctions on Russia, crippling its economy, and as arts and business ventures have moved swiftly to cut ties with Moscow, the country also faced ostracism by the sports world. At the opening ceremony of the Winter Paralympics in Beijing, the president of the International Paralympic Committee, XXX, denounced the Russian invasion, saying he was "horrified" by it and wanted to send a "a message of peace." Mr. XXX's speech - which President Xi Jinping of China attended - was notable partly because Mr. Xi is close with Mr. Putin and because it was a frank rebuke by the leader of a sports organization that traditionally stresses unity and comity. Chinese social media users said that the state-run broadcaster CCTV had censored part of the speech, stopping the Chinese translation for about one minute after Mr. XXX said, "At the XXX, we aspire to a better and more inclusive world, free from discrimination, free from hate, free from ignorance and free from conflict." Limbo for 19 Surrogate Babies in YYY KYIV, Ukraine - Down a dusty stairwell, hidden from the shelling that has become the grim background noise of Ukraine's capital, XXX fusses with the babies. There are 19 of them, sleeping or cooing in neatly arranged cribs, fed regularly from tubs of baby formula. The kitchen has a sterilizer for bottles, while the nursery has a changing station stocked with diapers. Ms. XXX and other nannies bounce the babies on their laps and straighten their bibs, even as they watch television, wide-eyed, to learn the latest news from the war. Death and destruction are rampant in Ukraine, but in this basement there is new life, if also new problems. The babies were born to surrogate mothers, with their biological parents still outside the country. Because of the war, the citizenship of the newborns is unclear, as is the question of who their legal guardians are, since under Ukrainian law their biological parents must be present to confirm their nationality. There is also the question of how, or if, they can possibly be taken to safety. Elsewhere, expectant surrogate mothers are trapped by the fighting. Couples abroad have no idea how they will pick up their babies. One agent who connects would-be parents with Ukrainian women made a dash out of Kyiv with two of her clients' newborns. In the Kyiv basement, Ms. XXX and the other nannies are caring for the babies, even as they grow increasingly worried about the war raging overhead. "Of course we cannot abandon the babies," said Ms. XXX, 51. Her husband and two sons, all soldiers in Ukraine's army, have urged her to get out of Kyiv. "They want me to leave, but I cannot abandon my colleagues, I cannot abandon my work, I cannot abandon these babies," she said. "I will remain here until everything is back in its place." Ukraine is one of relatively few countries that offer surrogacy services to foreigners. By some estimates, its industry is the largest in the world; lawyers involved in the business say about 500 women are now pregnant in Ukraine as surrogate mothers for foreign clients. Couples in the United States, Europe, South America and China who cannot have children on their own have turned to Ukraine. Advocates say that surrogacy is safe and provides an irreplaceable service to such couples. The business has thrived in Ukraine largely because of poverty. Surrogate mothers here typically earn about $15,000 per child. Ukraine does not allow surrogacy for same-sex couples, or for couples who wish to choose the sex of their child. Fourteen companies offer the service in Ukraine, including BioTexCom, the largest, which is running the basement nursery in Kyiv. XXX, the owner of BioTexCom, said in an interview that he had faced a hard choice in setting up the basement nursery. The other option, he said, had been to drive about 40 women who were near term across Ukraine during the fighting. He promised to care for the babies. But Mr. XXX was also fretting about the choice he had made. "Maybe I made the wrong decision," he said. If the situation worsened, he said he would close the basement nursery and try to evacuate the babies. Some people in the business have already fled with babies, though the legal implications of doing so are unclear. XXX, who has worked as an agent arranging surrogacy services, said she took two newborns to the western city of YYY, near the border with Slovakia. "The babies are all right," she said. "A nanny that I hired and I take good care of them. I do not have a choice but to look after them now." The clients are two couples in China. Ms. XXX is also keeping track of two pregnant surrogate mothers who were hired by other clients. They are near their due dates but trapped not far from Kyiv, she said. She is trying to have them moved to a maternity ward in western Ukraine in time to give birth. The business of overseas surrogacy typically relies on careful choreography of travel and legal services, all now disrupted by the war. XXX, an expectant surrogate mother who, like others quoted, spoke on the condition that only her first name be used, has not left Kyiv because her husband enlisted as a volunteer soldier and she wants to be near him. She is also caring for her own son, she said by telephone. "I really don't want to leave him behind. But I have to save two lives: one inside me and the other nine years old and running around" their apartment, she said. The biological parents of the baby she is carrying are from China, she said. While they have a stake in her safety, they cannot now make decisions about her movements. "I hope the war will end by the time I need to give birth," she said. XXX, 26, who has two children of her own, is pregnant as a surrogate mother for the second time. The first time, the baby could not immediately be picked up by clients because of Covid-19 travel restrictions. "I'm just not lucky," she said. She is now 31 weeks pregnant with twins and living near Lviv after fleeing YYY, in central Ukraine. Her clients, she said, want her to move to Western Europe. But she is afraid to do so, because she may be required to register as the babies' legal guardian under the less permissive surrogacy laws that prevail outside Ukraine. Frederic, the twins' biological father, shares the same fears as XXX about the legal uncertainties. He and his wife are from France, where surrogacy arrangements face greater legal hurdles. In November, as alarms were being raised about the possibility of war in Ukraine, Frederic insisted that the surrogacy agency let him contact XXX directly. He and his wife went to Ukraine, and now live together near Lviv with XXX, her husband and her two children. "We feel very lonely in this process," Frederic said. One of their many problems is that all the documents proving that he and his wife are the twins' genetic parents were left behind in Kyiv. "Have you heard of any family with the same problem as ours?" he asked. At BioTexCom's basement nursery in Kyiv, the babies sleep in numbered cribs. A doctor comes by regularly for checkups. The space is clean and well lit. Their swaddles are in prints of pink elephants or flowers. "The parents are very worried about the situation in Ukraine," Ms. XXX, the nanny, said. "They are just waiting for the end of this senseless war." Sometimes, she said, she feels that she is sleeping and wants to awake to Ukraine before the war. "This is just a nightmare," she said. "I want to wake up." But she said the basement was safe, and that she would remain with the babies. Ms. XXX had a message for the babies' parents: "They are cared for, they are fed, they are loved. We have all we need." Volunteer Hackers Join Conflict, Scrambling a Digital Battlefield The hackers came from around the world. They knocked Russian and Ukrainian government websites offline, graffitied antiwar messages onto the home pages of Russian media outlets and leaked data from rival hacking operations. And they swarmed into chat rooms, awaiting new instructions and egging each other on. The war in Ukraine has provoked an onslaught of cyberattacks by apparent volunteers unlike any that security researchers have seen in previous conflicts, creating widespread disruption, confusion and chaos that researchers fear could provoke more serious attacks by nation-state hackers, escalate the war on the ground or harm civilians. "It is crazy, it is bonkers, it is unprecedented," said XXX, the director of threat intelligence at the security firm Cisco Talos. "This is not going to be solely a conflict among nations. There are going to be participants that are not under the strict control of any government." The online battles have blurred the lines between state-backed hackers and patriotic amateurs, making it difficult for governments to understand who is attacking them and how to retaliate. But both Ukraine and Russia appear to have embraced tech-savvy volunteers, creating channels on the chat app Telegram to direct them to target specific websites. Hackers have inserted themselves in international conflicts before in places like Syria. But experts said that those efforts have attracted fewer participants. The hundreds of hackers now racing to support their respective governments represent a drastic and unpredictable expansion of cyberwarfare. The involvement of the volunteer hackers makes it more difficult to determine who is responsible for an online attack. Some of the hackers said they were Ukrainians living inside and outside the country. Some said they were citizens of other countries who were simply interested in the conflict. It was impossible in some circumstances to verify their identities. Their attacks stand apart from the sophisticated incursions made by nation-state hackers in recent years. While hackers affiliated with the Russian government have quietly infiltrated American government agencies and Fortune 500 companies, these participants have loudly proclaimed their allegiances and used simpler methods to topple or deface websites. And while their tactics appear to have been successful in some instances, security researchers cautioned it was unrealistic to believe cyberattacks by volunteer hackers without specialized technical expertise would play a determinative role in the military campaign on the ground. "The land invasion is advancing, people are suffering, buildings are being destroyed," said XXX, an independent cybersecurity researcher and a former cyberwarfare adviser for the International Committee of the Red Cross in YYY. "Cyberattacks can't realistically impact this." Ukraine has been more deliberate about recruiting a volunteer hacking force. In Telegram channels, participants cheer their collaboration with the government in going after targets such as Sberbank, the Russian state-owned bank. From Russia, where links between the government and hacking groups have long raised alarms among Western officials, there has not been the same kind of overt calls to action. "We are creating an I.T. army," Ukraine's minister of digital transformation, XXX, tweeted on Saturday, directing cybersecurity enthusiasts to a Telegram channel that contained instructions for knocking Russian websites offline. "There will be tasks for everyone." By Friday, the Telegram channel had more than 285,000 subscribers. Inside the main English-language Telegram page for the I.T. Army of Ukraine is a 14-page introductory document providing details about how people can participate, including what software to download to mask their whereabouts and identity. Every day, new targets are listed, including websites, telecommunications firms, banks and A.T.M. processors. XXX, the co-founder of the Ukrainian cybersecurity company Cyber Unit Technologies, said he was flooded with notes after posting on social media a call for programmers to get involved. His company offered a $100,000 reward for those who identify flaws in the code of Russian cyber targets. Mr. XXX said there were more than 1,000 people involved in his effort, working in close collaboration with the government. People were only allowed to join if somebody vouched for them. Organized into small groups, they were aiming to hit high-impact targets like infrastructure and logistics systems important to the Russian military. "It's become an independent machine, a distributed international digital army," Mr. XXX said. "The biggest hacks against Russia will be soon," he added, without elaborating. A government spokesman confirmed the work with Mr. XXX. Figuring out who is behind a cyberattack is always difficult. Groups falsely take credit or boast of a bigger impact than actually occurred. But this week there was a string of attacks against Russian targets. The country's largest stock exchange, a state-controlled bank and the Russian Foreign Ministry were taken offline for a time after being targeted by Ukraine's volunteer hackers. On Monday, TripAdvisor and Google Maps halted reviews at some locations in Russia, Ukraine and Belarus after pro-Ukraine volunteers targeted the sites to share uncensored information with the Russian public about the war. On Wednesday, the website of the main Russian intelligence service, the F.S.B., was declared a target by the group. A few hours later, a picture was posted to the I.T. Army Telegram channel showing it had been taken down, a claim that could not be independently verified. "They could not overcome your attacks," the group said on Telegram, a message that was reposted by Mr. XXX. The worst fears of military analysts and cybersecurity experts - that Russia would use devastating cyberattacks to take down critical Ukrainian infrastructure like energy, government services and internet access - have not yet occurred. Yet the involvement of nongovernment groups could escalate quickly and cause unintended consequences, experts warned. A malware attack against one target could quickly spill over and become uncontrollable, as it did during a 2017 attack on Ukrainian government and business computer systems. Or a government might mistake an amateur attack for a state-backed one and decide to retaliate. "In this quickly escalating situation they are taking steps on behalf of the government that can have very serious repercussions on civilians. This is the big risk," said XXX, chief public policy officer at CyberPeace Institute in YYY. XXX, who founded the cybersecurity firm Hold Security and who has studied Russian ransomware groups, said attacks by volunteers on the Russian government were likely to draw a stiff response. "Those that support the Russian government and their invasion in Ukraine are preparing their retaliation against a number of different targets," Mr. XXX said. In a Telegram channel called Russian Cyber Front, pro-Russia hackers were instructed to target a Ukrainian government website through which citizens can access digital copies of their drivers' licenses, passports and other documentation. "Attack those who threaten our I.T. infrastructure and dare to attack our resources," the channel instructed. It was not clear whether their efforts succeeded. Over the past two weeks, there have been a number of cyberattacks of Ukrainian targets without clear attribution of who was behind the assaults, according to CyberPeace Institute, which has been tracking cybersecurity events in the war. Malware linked to Russia targeted Ukrainian government computer systems in the days before the invasion, Microsoft said this week, and Ukrainian officials said Russia was likely behind another attack that took down some mobile services. There have been unattributed attacks against an English-language news outlet, the Kyiv Post, and a border control station where people were fleeing into Romania, according to CyberPeace Institute. Last week, a ransomware group known as XXX declared its support for Russia. "If anybody will decide to organize a cyberattack or any war activities against Russia, we are going to use our all possible resources to strike back at the critical infrastructures of an enemy," the group, which is known for capturing corporate data and charging companies to return it, said in a blog post. But days later, internal files from XXX began to leak online - the apparent result of a hacking operation. The files exposed discussions among members of the group and some of the digital wallets they used to hold cryptocurrency. In neighboring Belarus, a hacktivist group called Belarusian Cyber Partisans said it had targeted train services in Belarus that were carrying Russian military supplies toward Ukraine, though there was not independent verification of whether the work was successful. Cyber Partisans, formed in 2020 to oppose the authoritarian government of President XXX of Belarus, has become a model for hacktivists for leaking troves of information from government and police databases. After Russia began using Belarus as a staging area for the invasion, the group began working with Ukrainian activists, lending technical support and helping recruit new volunteers. "This is war and you fight back," said XXX, a U.S.-based spokeswoman for the Cyber Partisans. Lviv, the 'Soul' of the Country, Turns Itself Into a Strategic Hub LVIV, Ukraine - Municipal workers were wrapping statues in protective coverings and boarding up the stained-glass windows of the many churches that fill this historic European city in western Ukraine, as the population readied for war. The city of Lviv, no more than 50 miles from the border with Poland, has been spared any direct attack so far in the first 10 days of Russia's invasion. But it is rapidly becoming an important rear base - channeling supplies and men to the frontline cities and supporting hundreds of thousands of people fleeing the other way. This genteel city of cobbled streets and YYY-Hungarian architecture - a UNESCO world heritage site - has already become home for foreign embassies and government departments relocated from the capital, Kyiv, and is the main route in for medicines, equipment and personnel. According to Western intelligence analysts, foreign-supplied weapons are also being brought through this region across the land border with Poland. "The Lviv region is a live corridor," said XXX, 44, an economics professor and former member of Parliament who was organizing supplies and medical training for volunteers at a center for army veterans in the city. The region has five border crossings into the neighboring countries of Poland, Slovakia and Romania, and one through the Carpathian Mountains, she said. "It's the only point of supply and also the way the refugees can evacuate through." Lviv's train station is clogged with thousands of people waiting for the four trains a day that still ply the route to Poland, and cars packed with families tail back for almost 10 miles at the main land crossing at XXX. Officials were bracing for tens of thousands more refugees expected to arrive Friday from a mass exodus from the capital, Kyiv, amid what refugee officials say is already the largest movement of refugees within Europe since World War II. "We will have a humanitarian crisis in Lviv tonight," warned XXX, a lawmaker on the City Council who is helping direct the effort to support refugees. "We had 30,000 people arrive last night," she said. "Tonight we will have 100,000." There are not enough places to sleep, food to distribute and shelter for the crowds, she said. Yet as people flee, others are returning and regrouping. Volunteers were loading boxes of supplies onto a train heading back east to Kharkiv, Ukraine's second-largest city, which has suffered heavy Russian bombardment for days. Groups of men in woolen hats and winter jackets were boarding the train, too. They had left jobs in Europe to come back and enlist in the fight, from YYY, Berlin and Warsaw, one said. "We are at war and someone has to defend the country," said XXX, 41, a welder who had traveled back from Poland and was heading home to eastern Ukraine. Lviv has so far escaped attack because Russian forces are focusing their attention for now on the largest and most strategic cities, including the capital, Kyiv. But Western and Ukrainian officials say the Russians made an attempt in the first hours of the invasion to drop paratroopers into the woods outside the city. A firefight ensued that thwarted the attempt, the city's mayor, XXX, said in an interview. The deployment of paratroopers is a recognition of the importance of Lviv not only as a supply route and rear base, but as a cultural and spiritual center of Ukrainian resistance, especially if the capital, Kyiv, is encircled and cut off. "Kyiv is the heart of Ukraine, Lviv is the soul," the mayor said, using a phrase that many inhabitants repeat. "We are the diplomatic capital of Ukraine right now," he said. "And a lot of government agencies have their headquarters here right now because they moved here to have adequate accommodation, and so all the government systems are in operation despite the bombardment." Lviv has its own singular history that both separates it from the rest of Ukraine and inspires the nation. It is in a largely agricultural region where the people are more conservative, close to nature, and, according to Soviet stereotypes, seen as less sophisticated than those in the more industrialized eastern part of the country, said XXX, a professor of Cultural Studies at the Ukrainian Catholic University in Lviv. For 200 years of its recent history until 1939, Lviv was a separate state from the rest of the country, first as part of the YYY monarchy and later as part of Poland, YYY, a professor of contemporary history of Ukraine at the same establishment, wrote in an electronic message. "Besides, Lviv was the center of the Greek Catholic Church, founded in the late 16th century, while most Ukrainians living in the Russian Empire were Orthodox." And because Lviv and western Ukraine only came under Moscow's rule after World War II, it spent a shorter time under Russian and Soviet influence. Ukrainian is much more widely spoken in the western regions than elsewhere, and Lviv was often in the forefront of the Ukrainian national movement, including during the breakup of the Soviet Union. "Even in the 1970s and 1980s, there was a strong anti-Soviet sentiment in Lviv," Mr. XXX wrote. "That is why, in 1990-1991, Lviv residents were among the strongest supporters of Ukraine's separation from the YYY" That spirit of resistance is now everywhere in Ukraine, and while Kyiv is the center of the resistance today, historians and politicians said, the inhabitants of Lviv remain proud of their reputations as nationalist leaders. Former members of a militia group, who ran security and medical evacuations when fighting broke out in eastern Ukraine in 2014, were reorganizing this week in a private school in the city. Their motto, "Slaves are not taken to heaven," was that of a legendary Cossack leader. Their guards were out on the first night of the war helping defend the airport, said XXX, a lawyer who heads the organization. "Now we are organizing people from abroad and getting those who want to go closer to the front." The Ukrainian army is better trained and equipped than when the fighting first broke out seven years ago, but their members were supporting them, a veteran of the group said. "We are here but lots of our brothers are in spots all over Ukraine," he said, giving only his first name and military nickname, Ihor "Sava." A former military engineer from YYY, XXX, said he had already set up a website to help fund raise and bring in nonlethal equipment to help equip new recruits. Two women inside the office were helping with logistics for people volunteering from abroad. Across town men lined up outside a hunting shop to purchase rifles. And, at a military school, hundreds of men were registering to join the territorial defense force Friday morning. As an air raid siren sounded, noncommissioned army officers led groups of recruits into the basement to demonstrate how to dismantle and operate a Kalashnikov assault rifle. Artists, designers and software developers were among those signing up. "I think we must, so that we are one people," said XXX, 42, a designer. "They are already fighting in Kyiv and Kharkiv, so this will show our unity and our strength to the world." XXX contributed reporting. 'The Entire Sky Was in Flames', Attack Spreads Pain and Fear NOVOYAVORIVSK, Ukraine - Hours after Russian missiles decimated a military base near the Polish border on Sunday, soldiers in camouflage were still being wheeled out of an overwhelmed nearby hospital on stretchers, many in so much pain they could only turn their heads to reveal eyes stricken with fear. The soldiers, who were headed to larger hospitals with more capacity, were casualties in one of the worst attacks in the war thus far by Russian forces on the western region of Ukraine. The base at Yavoriv, a strategic hub for military training, is roughly a dozen miles from the border with Poland, a member of the NATO alliance and the European Union. It was the closest Russian missiles had landed near NATO territory since Russia invaded Ukraine, deepening fears that the conflict could spread into a wider war. "After us, comes Europe," said Volodymyr Matseliukh, the mayor of the nearby town of YYY. "For as long as Russia is not punished, no one in Ukraine or in Europe is safe." With much of the fighting in recent weeks contained to Ukraine's south, north and east, many have tried to escape the violence by traveling west to places like YYY, the town near the base, which until early Saturday morning had not been bombed since the first day of the war. "People thought they were safe here because they are under NATO's shelter, due to the proximity of the border," said XXX, a banker and former Ukrainian government minister who had come from the capital, Kyiv, to YYY, his hometown. "Now people are really panicked," he said. "They began looking for real shelters. They had this illusion that we are so close, that XXX missiles from Poland will shoot whatever flies in proximity. But it appears that this is not the case." Flames ripped through the sky just before dawn on Sunday as the attack began, following a series of deafening explosions. In a matter of seconds, entire structures could be seen crumpled to the ground in footage sent to The New York Times by a fighter at the base, the booms roaring and clouds of smoke blocking out the sky. Vasil, a middle-aged bus driver who had been on his way back from driving refugees to the border, said it was around 5:50 a.m. when he heard the deep "buh-buh" blast. "The entire sky was in flames," he said. Vasil, who declined to give his last name out of fear for his personal security, added: "I am a God-fearing man. I took off my hat, looked at the sky and prayed." The strike killed at least 35 people and injured at least 134 more, according to Ukrainian officials. Russia's Defense Ministry claimed it killed 180 foreign fighters in the attack. The Times could not independently verify either count, and government sources on each side have been found to inflate their opponents' military casualties. About 1,000 foreigners hoping to help Ukraine fight Russia were believed to be training at the base, known as the International Peacekeeping and Security Center, part of the new International Legion that Ukraine has formed to help repel Russia. The authorities did not mention whether any foreign citizens were among the dead or wounded. Videos show several structures nearly destroyed, or still burning, as well as a large crater next to the camp's training facility and sports fields. The crater was so deep a truck could fit into it, the man taking the video can be heard saying. The fires raged for hours after the explosion and were not extinguished until around 3 p.m. Soldiers who were on the base during the attack described the scene of terror. It was "hell," said XXX, a Swedish fighter. "They know exactly what to aim for. They know exactly what they did. And they were targeting us. And I said, in one hour we will be finished if we don't get out. And I told everybody, and a lot of people followed me, and a lot of people stayed." Mr. XXX added, "A lot of them are traumatized." An American fighter, who asked not to be identified over security concerns, said he had previously worked in explosives in Iraq for the military and described the missile hitting the ground, sounding like a jet crash. He said it set the roofs of buildings ablaze and sent people screaming. At the hospital in YYY, doctors could be seen on Sunday afternoon tending to the wounded who remained, calling out to nurses about spinal injuries, damaged ears and trauma to a skull. Since the 1990s, soldiers from the United States, Britain, Canada, Poland, Latvia and other Western allies have used the base to train Ukrainian forces. One of the buildings that was hit in the attack was in an area where American, Canadian and other foreign military instructors had stayed before the invasion, according to a broadcast journalist for the U.S. Army who covered multinational training at the base. Dozens of soldiers from the Florida Army National Guard had been training Ukrainian troops at the base as part of a NATO mission until Defense Secretary XXX ordered them to leave the country last month, days before the Russian invasion. The base has also trained troops for peacekeeping operations that Ukraine has participated in, often as part of United Nations missions elsewhere in Europe and in Africa. The town of YYY was established in the 1960s for workers at a nearby sulfur mine and the military base. High apartment buildings span the city's blocks, with large courtyards inside. Since the collapse of the Soviet Union 30 years ago, much of the town has been dependent on cross-border trade with Poland. After the blast at the military base, Mr. XXX, the banker and former Ukrainian government minister, said he packed up his parents, sister and extended family and sent them to Poland. His father, XXX, a retired engineer, had not wanted to leave the town he helped engineer and build, and his mother, XXX, had not anticipated the trip: A vase of orange tulips still sat on the kitchen table and a freshly made pot of chicken stock was on the stove on Sunday afternoon after they left. Mr. XXX's sister XXX cried as she said farewell to him and to her son-in-law Myroslav, neither of whom were allowed to leave the country because of a ban that Ukraine's president, Volodymyr Zelensky, instituted for men of military age. "What hurts me most is what they feel," Mr. XXX said. Early Sunday about a dozen families had been sleeping on mattresses in the gym of a nearby primary school when they were shaken awake by the attack. "It was so scary," said XXX, who had arrived five days earlier from Kharkiv, which has been heavily bombed by Russian artillery since the first days of the war. She was resting on a mattress with her sister, two daughters and 5-year-old son, XXX, who was watching cartoons. Sasha, Ms. XXX said, had been asking to sleep in the basement after Kharkiv was pounded for days with missiles. Several days ago, he announced that when he grows up, he will defend Ukraine against the enemy. "We thought we would be safe here," the mother said, "but now we cannot go outside." Attack on Ukrainian nuclear plant triggers worldwide alarm KYIV, Ukraine - Russian troops Friday seized the biggest nuclear power plant in Europe after a middle-of-the-night attack that set it on fire and briefly raised worldwide fears of a catastrophe in the most chilling turn yet in Moscow's invasion of Ukraine. Firefighters put out the blaze, and no radiation was released, U.N. and Ukrainian officials said. Russian forces pressed on with their week-old offensive on multiple fronts, though they did not appear to gain significant ground in fighting Friday. The number of refugees fleeing the country eclipsed 1.2 million. With world condemnation mounting, the Kremlin cracked down on the flow of information at home, blocking Facebook, Twitter, the BBC and the U.S. government-funded Voice of America. And President Vladimir Putin signed a law making it a crime punishable by up to 15 years in prison to spread so-called fake news, including anything that goes against the official government line on the war. While the vast Russian armored column threatening Kyiv remained stalled outside the capital, Putin's military has launched hundreds of missiles and artillery attacks on cities and other sites across the country, and made significant gains on the ground in the south in an apparent bid to cut off Ukraine's access to the sea. In the attack on the Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant in the southeastern city of YYY, the chief of the U.N.'s International Atomic Energy Agency, XXX, said a Russian "projectile" hit a training center, not any of the six reactors. The attack triggered global alarm and fear of a catastrophe that could dwarf the world's worst nuclear disaster, at Ukraine's YYY in 1986. In an emotional nighttime speech, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said he feared an explosion that would be "the end for everyone. The end for Europe. The evacuation of Europe." But nuclear officials from YYY to China said no radiation spikes had been reported, as did XXX. Authorities said Russian troops had taken control of the overall site but plant staff continued to run it. Only one reactor was operating, at 60% of capacity, Grossi said in the aftermath of the attack. Two people were injured in the fire, Grossi said. Ukraine's state nuclear plant operator XXX said three Ukrainian soldiers were killed and two wounded. In the U.S., Pentagon spokesman XXX said the episode "underscores the recklessness with which the Russians have been perpetrating this unprovoked invasion." At an emergency meeting of the U.N. Security Council, Ukraine's U.N. ambassador, XXX, said the fire broke out as a result of Russian shelling of the plant and accused Moscow of committing "an act of nuclear terrorism." Without producing evidence, Russian Defense Ministry spokesman XXX claimed that a Ukrainian "sabotage group" had set the fire at XXX. The crisis unfolded after XXX earlier in the week expressed grave concern that the fighting could cause accidental damage to Ukraine's 15 nuclear reactors at four plants around the country. Atomic safety experts said a war fought amid nuclear reactors represents an unprecedented and highly dangerous situation. "These plants are now in a situation that few people ever seriously contemplated when they were originally built," said XXX of the Union of Concerned Scientists in Washington. "No nuclear plant has been designed to withstand a potential threat of a full-scale military attack." Dr. XXX of International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War said the incident was probably the result of military units overestimating the precision of their weapons, given that the prevailing winds would have carried any radioactive fallout straight toward Russia. "Russia cannot have any interest in contaminating its own territory," he said. He said the danger comes not just from the reactors but from the risk of enemy fire hitting storage facilities that hold spent fuel rods. In the wake of the attack, XXX appealed again to the West to enforce a no-fly zone over his country. But NATO Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg ruled out that possibility, citing the risk of a much wider war in Europe. He said that to enforce a no-fly zone, NATO planes would have to shoot down Russian aircraft. In a bitter and emotional speech, XXX criticized NATO's reluctance, saying it will fully untie Russia's hands as it escalates its air attack. "All the people who die from this day forward will also die because of you, because of your weakness, because of your lack of unity," he said in a nighttime address. "The alliance has given the green light to the bombing of Ukrainian cities and villages by refusing to create a no-fly zone." Russian forces, meanwhile, did not make significant progress Friday in their offensive to sever Ukraine's access to the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov, which would deal a severe blow to its economy and could worsen an already dire humanitarian situation. There were also no changes in the north and the east, where the Russian offensive has stalled, meeting fierce Ukrainian resistance. A round of talks between Russia and Ukraine yielded a tentative agreement Thursday to set up safe corridors to evacuate citizens and deliver food and medicine. But the necessary details still had to be worked out. More than 840 children have been wounded in the war, and 28 have been killed, according to Ukraine's government. A total of 331 civilians had been confirmed killed in the invasion, but the true number is probably much higher, the U.N. human rights office said. In Romania, one newly arrived refugee, XXX, struggled to hold back tears as he recounted leaving everything behind in Kyiv and sleeping in churches with his wife and three children during their journey out. "I'm leaving my home, my country. I was born there, and I lived there," he said. "And what now?" Appearing on video in a message to antiwar protesters in several European cities, YYY continued to appeal for help. "If we fall, you will fall," he said. "And if we win, and I'm sure we'll win, this will be the victory of the whole democratic world. This will be the victory of our freedom. This will be the victory of light over darkness, of freedom over slavery." Inside Ukraine, frequent shelling could be heard in the center of Kyiv, though more distant than in recent days, with loud thudding every 10 minutes resonating over the rooftops. Ukrainian presidential adviser XXX said battles involving airstrikes and artillery continued northwest of Kyiv, and the northeastern cities of Kharkiv and Okhtyrka came under heavy fire. He said Ukrainian forces were still holding the northern city of YYY and the southern city of Mykolaiv. Ukrainian artillery also defended Ukraine's biggest port city, YYY, from repeated attempts by Russian ships, XXX said. Another strategic port, Mariupol, on the Sea of Azov, was "partially under siege," and Ukrainian forces were pushing back efforts to surround the city, XXX said. Amid the warfare, there were occasional signs of hope. As explosions sounded on the fringes of Kyiv, XXX and XXX smiled and blushed at the civil registry office where they married Friday. They fell in love in 2015 in Donetsk amid the fighting between pro-Russian separatists and Ukrainian forces that was a precursor to the countrywide war. "It's 2022 and the situation hasn't changed," Shybalov said. "It's scary to think what will happen when our children will be born." UN: 1.5 million refugees from Ukraine worst post-WWII crisis MEDYKA, Poland - The Ukrainian father of two took off with a sprint when he saw the GPS coordinates from his wife's cellphone draw nearer to the border crossing into Poland. XXX had been waiting for 11 days on the Polish side of the border for his wife, XXX, and two children to arrive from the Ukrainian capital, which had woken up to Russian shelling on Feb. 24. War had broken out at home just days after his arrival in the Polish city of Wroclow, near Germany, for a job installing solar panels. "I never believed war would start," XXX said, as he checked the GPS position of his arriving family. Nearby, the U.N. high commissioner for refugees, XXX, visited the same XXX border crossing, proclaiming the number of refugees leaving Ukraine the fastest-growing humanitarian crisis in Europe since World War II. In just 11 days, 1.5 million people had sought safety in neighboring countries. Just moments after the U.N. official spoke, XXX's wife and two children made the crossing themselves, in a small white Kia, which Alina had driven across Ukraine from Kyiv, in normal times an eight-hour drive. He lifted 4-year-old son David onto his shoulders, and cradled the baby, 8-month-old YYY, in his arms, looking lovingly at the tiny face, murmuring, "so beautiful." "I am so grateful," he said. Asked if he would return to Ukraine to fight, XXX said that for now his priority was to find a safe place for his family to stay. He remains worried about his brother, a charity worker, and retired parents back in Kyiv, trading frequent messages with them as he awaited his family. "I feel pity for the situation. I know it is very difficult for the people that are still there," he said. The number of refugees continued unabated Sunday, even as humanitarian corridors meant to ease the flight of refugees collapsed as quickly as they were agreed upon inside Ukraine. XXX said the humanitarian corridors also were critical to allowing basic goods to arrive to those in need and to evacuate the most vulnerable. "But what is needed really is a cease-fire, the end of hostilities, because that's the only way to stop this tragedy," XXX said. The sentiments were echoed by XXX, who made a powerful appeal for peace at the YYY Sunday, imploring "an end to the armed attacks, and that negotiations prevail." In a highly unusual move, the pontiff said he had dispatched two Cardinals to the war-ravaged country, signaling that the "Holy See is ready to do everything in the service of this peace." "In Ukraine, rivers of blood and tears are flowing," the pope said during his traditional Sunday blessing. "This is not just a military operation, but a war that is spreading a lot of destruction and misery. The victims continue to become more numerous, just like the people who are fleeing." One 11-year-old boy made it all the way to Slovakia from the city of YYY, the site of Ukraine's largest nuclear power plant taken by Russian troops that caught fire after a building was hit with a projectile. The boy's frightened mother sent him on the 1,000-kilometer (620-mile) journey alone by train to find relatives, staying behind to care for her sick mother who can't be moved. "He came with a plastic bag, passport and a telephone number written on his hand, all alone," according to a statement by Slovakia's Interior Ministry, who hailed the boy as "a true hero." Volunteers took care of him, took him to a warm shelter and gave him food and drinks, and later reunited him with family in YYY. In a video provided by Slovak police, the mother thanked the Slovak government and police for taking care of her son. "People with big hearts live in your small country. Please, save our Ukrainian children," said the mother, identified as XXX. In Romania, Ukrainian refugees gathered at the Saints Peter and Paul Christian Orthodox Church in YYY, to pray for peace. They were welcomed by Rev. XXX who is himself, Ukrainian-Romanian. "The first thing that we do as servants of the Church is talk to them, help them trust again, and understand that life doesn't end at the Ukrainian border, or any other border," said XXX, who has seen many refugees come by his church since the start of the Russian invasion of Ukraine on Feb. 24. XXX sought strength in the church. She is bringing her daughter to the Netherlands, where friends have offered her a place to say. But a journalist who has covered the brutalities of war, XXX is planning to go back to Ukraine, where her father and son remained to fight. "And we can't help with anything. It's scary. It's scary to understand that our boys, who go to fight have nothing. We can't provide bulletproof vests and helmet," she said. Text messages from friends tell her just how desperate the situation at home has become. "Please help!" they ask. "We are without electricity for three days. The (Russians) are close, we can't leave, we don't even have blankets, we can't feed our children," the write. For now, Oliinykova prays. "As a Christian it's very hard for me to hate," said XXX, who said she has relatives in Russia. "And I know that they are also shocked. I don't know how could I hate them. They are also sending young boys (to the war). How to get through all of this?" she asked. "I think we need less hate and more love." 40-mile Russian convoy threatens Kyiv KYIV, Ukraine - A 40-mile convoy of Russian tanks and other vehicles threatened Ukraine's capital Tuesday as an intense shelling attack targeted the country's second-largest city, and both sides looked to resume talks in the coming days aimed at stopping the fighting. The country's embattled president said he believed the stepped-up shelling was designed to force him into concessions. "I believe Russia is trying to put pressure (on Ukraine) with this simple method," Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said late Monday in a video address. He did not offer details of hourslong talks that took place Monday, but he said Kyiv was not prepared to make concessions "when one side is hitting another with rocket artillery." The developments came as Russia finds itself increasingly isolated as a result of international condemnation and potentially backbreaking economic sanctions. Five days into the invasion, the Russian military's movements have been stalled by fierce resistance on the ground and a surprising inability to dominate the airspace. The Kremlin has twice in as many days raised the specter of nuclear war and put on high alert an arsenal including intercontinental ballistic missiles and long-range bombers. Stepping up his rhetoric, President Vladimir Putin denounced the U.S. and its allies as an "empire of lies." Meanwhile, an embattled Ukraine moved to solidify its ties to the West by applying to join the European Union - a largely symbolic move for now, but one that is unlikely to sit well with Putin, who has long accused the U.S. of trying to pull Ukraine out of Moscow's orbit. A top Putin aide and head of the Russian delegation, XXX, said that the first talks held between the two sides since the invasion lasted nearly five hours and that the envoys "found certain points on which common positions could be foreseen." He said they agreed to continue the discussions in the days ahead. As the talks along the Belarusian border wrapped up, several blasts could be heard in Kyiv, and Russian troops advanced on the city of nearly 3 million. The vast convoy of armored vehicles, tanks, artillery and support vehicles was 17 miles (25 kilometers) from the center of the city and stretched for about 40 miles, according to satellite imagery from Maxar Technologies. People in Kyiv lined up for groceries after the end of a weekend curfew, standing beneath a building with a gaping hole blown in its side. Kyiv remained "a key goal" for the Russians, Zelenskyy said, noting that it was hit by three missile strikes on Monday and that hundreds of saboteurs were roaming the city. "They want to break our nationhood, that's why the capital is constantly under threat," Zelenskyy said. Messages aimed at the advancing Russian soldiers popped up on billboards, bus stops and electronic traffic signs across the capital. Some used profanity to encourage Russians to leave. Others appealed to their humanity. "Russian soldier - Stop! Remember your family. Go home with a clean conscience," one read. Video from Kharkiv, Ukraine's second-biggest city, with a population of about 1.5 million, showed residential areas being shelled, with apartment buildings shaken by repeated, powerful blasts. Authorities in Kharkiv said at least seven people had been killed and dozens injured. They warned that casualties could be far higher. "They wanted to have a blitzkrieg, but it failed, so they act this way," said 83-year-old XXX, who watched the shelling from his downtown apartment. He gave just his first name and his patronymic, a middle name derived from his father's name, out of fear for his safety. The Russian military has denied targeting residential areas despite abundant evidence of shelling of homes, schools and hospitals. Fighting raged in other towns and cities across the country. The strategic port city of Mariupol, on the Sea of Azov, is "hanging on," said Zelenskyy adviser XXX. An oil depot was reported bombed in the eastern city of YYY. Russian artillery hit a military base in YYY, a city between Kharkiv and Kyiv, and more than 70 Ukrainian soldiers were killed, the head of the region wrote on Telegram. XXX posted photographs of the charred shell of a four-story building and rescuers searching rubble. In a later Facebook post, he said many Russian soldiers and some local residents also were killed during the fighting on Sunday. The report could not immediately be confirmed. Despite its vast military strength, Russia still lacked control of Ukrainian airspace, a surprise that may help explain how Ukraine has so far prevented a rout. In the seaside resort town of YYY, dozens of protesters chanted angrily in the main square against Russian occupiers, yelling at them to go home and singing the Ukrainian national anthem. They described the soldiers as exhausted young conscripts. "Frightened kids, frightened looks. They want to eat," XXX, who runs a small shop, said by telephone. He said the soldiers went into a supermarket and grabbed canned meat, vodka and cigarettes. "They ate right in the store," he said. "It looked like they haven't been fed in recent days." Across Ukraine, terrified families huddled overnight in shelters, basements or corridors. "I sit and pray for these negotiations to end successfully, so that they reach an agreement to end the slaughter," said XXX, weeping as she clutched her cat in a shelter in Mariupol. Around her, parents tried to console children and keep them warm. For many, Russia's announcement of a nuclear high alert stirred fears that the West could be drawn into direct conflict with Russia. But a senior U.S. defense official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said the United States had yet to see any appreciable change in Russia's nuclear posture. As far-reaching Western sanctions on Russian banks and other institutions took hold, the ruble plummeted, and Russia's Central Bank scrambled to shore it up, as did Putin, signing a decree restricting foreign currency. But that did little to calm Russian fears. In Moscow, people lined up to withdraw cash as the sanctions threatened to drive up prices and reduce the standard of living for millions of ordinary Russians. In yet another blow to Russia's economy, oil giant Shell said it was pulling out of the country because of the invasion. It announced it will withdraw from its joint ventures with state-owned gas company YYY and other entities and end its involvement in the Nord Stream 2 pipeline project between Russia and Europe. The economic sanctions, ordered by the U.S. and other allies, were just one contributor to Russia's growing status as a pariah country. Russian airliners are banned from European airspace, Russian media is restricted in some countries, and some high-tech products can no longer be exported to the country. On Monday, in a major blow to a soccer-mad nation, Russian teams were suspended from all international soccer. In other developments: YYY Prime Minister XXX announced that his country would provide Ukraine with $50 million in missiles, ammunition and other military hardware. The chief prosecutor of the International Criminal Court said he will open an investigation soon into possible war crimes and crimes against humanity in Ukraine. Cyberattacks hit Ukrainian embassies around the world, and Russian media outlets. The United States announced it is expelling 12 members of Russia's U.N. mission, accusing them of spying. The 193-nation U.N. General Assembly opened its first emergency session in decades, with Assembly President XXX calling for an immediate cease-fire and "a full return to diplomacy and dialogue." The U.N. human rights chief said at least 102 civilians have been killed and hundreds wounded - warning that figure is probably a vast undercount - and Ukraine's president said at least 16 children were among the dead. More than a half-million people have fled the country since the invasion, another U.N. official said, many of them going to Poland, Romania and YYY. Among the refugees in YYY was XXX, 24, an information technology project manager from a city west of Kyiv. She said her father stayed behind to fight the Russians. "I am proud about him," she said, adding that many of her friends were planning to fight too. Two Refugees Cross Poland's Border, and Enter Different Worlds KUZNICA, Poland - On the day war broke out in Ukraine, Albagir, a 22-year-old refugee from YYY, was lying on the frozen forest floor at the gateway to Poland, trying to stay alive. Drones sent by the Polish border patrol were looking for him. So were helicopters. It was night, with subzero temperatures and snow everywhere. Albagir, a pre-med student, and a small band of African refugees were trying to sneak into Poland, down to the last few shriveled dates in their pockets. "We were losing hope," he said. That same night in a small town near Odessa, XXX, 21, grabbed a suitcase and her tablet, which she uses for her animation work, and jumped with her family into a burgundy Toyota Rav 4. They rushed off in a four-car convoy with eight adults and five children, part of the frantic exodus of people trying to escape war-torn Ukraine. "At that point, we didn't know where we were going," she said. Over the next two weeks, what would happen to these two refugees crossing into the same country at the same time, both about the same age, could not stand in starker contrast. XXX was punched in the face, called racial slurs and left in the hands of a border guard who, XXX said, brutally beat him and seemed to enjoy doing it. XXX wakes up every day to a stocked fridge and fresh bread on the table, thanks to a man she calls a saint. Their disparate experiences underscore the inequalities of Europe's refugee crisis. They are victims of two very different geopolitical events, but are pursuing the same mission - escape from the ravages of war. As Ukraine presents Europe with its greatest surge of refugees in decades, many conflicts continue to burn in the Middle East and Africa. Depending on which war a person is fleeing, the welcome will be very different. From the instant they cross into Poland, Ukrainian refugees like Ms. XXX are treated to live piano music, bottomless bowls of borscht and, often, a warm bed. And that's just the beginning. They can fly for free all across Europe on YYY's Wizz Air. In Germany, crowds line up at train stations, waving Ukrainian flags. And all European Union countries, many of which can trace blood ties to Ukrainians, now allow them to stay for up to three years. Watching all this on a TV in a safe house in the Polish countryside, where it's too dangerous for him to even step outside, Albagir, who asked that his last name not be used because he crossed the border illegally, said he was almost in a state of shock. "Why don't we see this caring and this love? Why?" he asked. "Are Ukrainians better than us? I don't know. Why?" What Albagir experienced has been repeated countless times, from the Mediterranean Sea to the English Channel, as European governments have made it difficult for migrants from Africa and the Middle East to enter their countries - sometimes using excessive force to keep them out. His journey was complicated by the fact that he chose to enter Poland from Belarus, a Russian ally that Western countries said manufactured a huge refugee crisis last year. After Belarus invited in tens of thousands of desperate people from conflict-ridden countries like YYY, Iraq and Syria and directed them to Poland's frontier as a way to cause havoc in Europe, Poland responded by harshly cracking down at that border. Ukrainians are victims of a conflict on European soil that creeps closer by the day. The result is a response from Europeans that is largely loaded with compassion. That leaves refugees from more distant wars feeling the sting of inequality and, some say, racism. "This is the first time we are seeing such contrast between the treatment of different groups of refugees," said XXX, a migration analyst in Brussels, who added that Europeans see Ukrainians as being "like us." On Feb. 25, the day after Russia invaded Ukraine, Ms. XXX was sitting shotgun in her family's car, racing through Moldova, guzzling Pepsi. As she looked out the window, she saw people cheering, waving and giving them the thumbs up. She started to cry. "It was not the bad parts that broke us down, but the good parts," Ms. XXX said. "You're not preparing yourself emotionally for the fact that the entire world is going to support you." Driving west, they argued about where to go. Someone said Latvia, another YYY. But Ms. XXX had her own plan, albeit a bit random. She had studied animation at a college in Warsaw and her roommate's parents knew a man whose father had a spare house in the Polish countryside. If this worked out, she could go back to animation school and fulfill her dream of making children's cartoons. She convinced her family: On to Poland. On this same day, XXX was still trapped in the forest on Poland's border with Belarus. He's been on the run for years. As a boy, XXX said he watched his homeland of YYY ripped apart by war and saw "everything you can imagine." Then he fled to YYY, YYY's capital, to study medicine. But YYY soon exploded into chaos too. So last November he said he traveled to Moscow on a student visa to take courses at a private university, but after Russia invaded Ukraine, triggering severe sanctions, XXX feared that his university might be ostracized. So he fled again. His plan was to travel from Russia to Belarus to Poland to Germany, but he said he hadn't known that Poland had just reinforced its border to repel the migrants coming from Belarus. About 130 miles away, to the south, Ms. XXX's convoy finally reached its destination, a farmhouse deep in the Polish countryside. Suddenly, a burly man with thinning gray hair emerged from the darkness. "Hello, I am XXX," he said. XXX and his wife, XXX, hugged them and they all started crying. But the tears didn't stop in the driveway. Ms. XXX's family walked into the kitchen and saw the three-course meal that their hosts had prepared for them, and cried. They stepped into the bathroom to a row of brand-new toothbrushes, soaps and shampoos, and cried. They saw freshly washed sheets, towels, and blankets lined up on their beds, and cried. Mr. XXX, an apple farmer, had never helped refugees before, but said that when the war broke out, he "couldn't stay indifferent." A few nights later, while Ms. XXX and her family were admiring a stack of toys that their hosts brought for the children, XXX and three men he was traveling with were arrested. They had made it across the Polish border undetected, but the driver they hired to get them to Germany forgot to turn on his headlights and was stopped. XXX said Polish police officers stole their SIM cards and power banks; disabled their phones (so they couldn't call for help); and drove them back to the place they dreaded: the forest. At least 19 people have frozen to death in recent months trying to get into Poland after Polish border guards pushed them back into this forest, human rights groups say. Polish officials insisted it was not their fault. "It's the Belarusians'," said XXX, a Border Guard spokeswoman. "They direct these people." Human rights defenders say the Polish guards are also guilty of abuses. A Polish government spokesperson declined to discuss the treatment of refugees. "Go! Go!" the Polish guards yelled at Albagir's group, shoving them at gunpoint toward a barbed wire fence in an isolated part of the forest, Albagir said. The guards threw one of the men into the fence so hard that he sliced open his hand, XXX said. When interviewed, he showed a gash mark between his fingers. A few hours later, after wandering with little food or water and no way to navigate, they reached a Belarusian border post and begged the guards to let them in. "We needed shelter," XXX said. But the Belarusians had other plans. Border guards grabbed them and threw them in a frigid garage, Albagir said. A huge Belarusian soldier screamed racial slurs and angrily assaulted them. "He punched us, he kicked us, he threw us down, he hit us with sticks," XXX said. He said there was one light-skinned Kurd detained in the garage with them whom the soldier didn't touch. The soldier then marched them to the forest and said: "Go Poland. If you come back, we will kill you." According to human rights groups, tens of thousands of refugees have been pushed back and forth between Poland and Belarus, trapped in limbo, unable to enter either country or go back home. On March 5, XXX and his group crossed the border into Poland for the second time within a week, faint and nearly frostbitten. They called a number they had been given in case they got in trouble, and a Polish activist secretly took them into her home, and warned them not to step outside. Their experience would not be totally devoid of acts of kindness. XXX plans to apply for asylum in Germany, which has a reputation of being generous to all refugees, and finish his studies. He speaks Arabic, English and some Russian and wears gold rimmed specs and has a neat beard. He dreams of becoming a doctor and writing a book about what he just experienced. He said he still can't believe educated people from relatively prosperous countries would treat people in need this way. One of the men with him, named XXX, couldn't speak English, so he typed a message into his phone and hit play. The phone's robotic voice intoned: "All of Europe says that there are rights for every human being and we did not see that." When asked if he believed racism was a factor in how they were treated, XXX did not hesitate. "Yeah, so much," he said. "Only racism." For Ms. XXX's family, the treatment just gets better and better. Mr. XXX enrolled her brother and sister in a primary school - the Polish government has extended free education and health care to Ukrainian refugees. "It seems like the whole country is slightly bending the rules for Ukrainians," said Ms. XXX, after a doctor refused to accept payment for a visit. When her hosts were asked if they would take in African or Middle Eastern refugees, Ms. XXX said, "Yes, but we had no opportunity." But Ms. XXX said it would be "easier" to host Ukrainians because they shared a culture. For refugees from Arab countries and Africa, she asked, "What would I cook for them?"' Last Thursday, Mr. XXX spoke to a friend about finding Ms. XXX a job as a translator. That same afternoon, XXX and the others made it to a safe house in Warsaw. Once again, they were told not to step outside. Russia cracks down on dissenting media, blocks Facebook DUSSELDORF, Germany - Russian President Vladimir Putin on Friday intensified a crackdown on media outlets and individuals who fail to hew to the Kremlin line on Russia's war in Ukraine, blocking Facebook and Twitter and signing into law a bill that criminalizes the intentional spreading of what Moscow deems to be "fake" reports. The moves against the social media giants follow blocks imposed on the BBC, the U.S. government-funded Voice of America and Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, German broadcaster XXX and Latvia-based website XXX. The government's sweeping action against the foreign outlets that publish news in Russian seeks to establish even tighter controls over what information the domestic audience sees about the invasion of Ukraine. The state communications watchdog XXX said it cut access to Twitter and Facebook in line with a decision by the prosecutor general's office. The watchdog has previously accused Twitter of failing to delete the content banned by Russian authorities and slowed down access to it. Twitter said in a statement Friday afternoon that while the company is "aware of reports" that its platform is blocked in Russia, it has not been able to confirm whether this is the case. The bill, quickly rubber-stamped by both houses of the Kremlin-controlled parliament and signed by Putin, imposes prison sentences of up to 15 years for those spreading information that goes against the Russian government's narrative on the war. The question regarding Russia is no longer "what we do to stop disinformation," former U.S. ambassador to Russia XXX said on Friday. "The question has to be how do we promote information inside Russia -- and I don't have the answer." Multiple outlets said they would pause their work inside Russia to evaluate the situation. Among them, CNN and CBS News said they would stop broadcasting in Russia while Bloomberg and the BBC said they would temporarily suspend the work of their journalists there. Russian authorities have repeatedly and falsely decried reports of Russian military setbacks or civilian deaths in Ukraine as "fake" news. State media outlets refer to Russia's invasion of Ukraine as a "special military operation" rather than a war or an invasion. XXX, the speaker of the lower house of parliament, said the measure "will force those who lied and made statements discrediting our armed forces to bear very grave punishment." "I want everyone to understand, and for society to understand, that we are doing this to protect our soldiers and officers, and to protect the truth," he added. The law envisages sentences of up to three years or fines for spreading what authorities deem to be false news about the military, but the maximum punishment rises to 15 years for cases deemed to have led to "severe consequences." In blocking Facebook, XXX cited its alleged "discrimination" of the Russian media and state information resources. The agency said in a statement that the restrictions introduced by Facebook owner Meta on the Russian news channel RT and other state-controlled media violate Russian law. "Obviously Putin is shutting these people down because he is afraid. He wouldn't be shutting them down if everything was going peachy keen," McFaul said during a call with reporters and experts hosted by Stanford's Cyber Policy Center. "This is an indicator of his state of mind." XXX, Meta's president of global affairs, said tweeted in response to Russia's action that "millions of ordinary Russians will find themselves cut off from reliable information, deprived of their everyday ways of connecting with family and friends and silenced from speaking out." "We will continue to do everything we can to restore our services so they remain available to people to safely and securely express themselves and organize for action," XXX added. The Russian media blocks on the five foreign media organizations are among the most influential and often critical foreign media publishing in Russian. XXX said those media had published "false information" on subjects including "the methods of carrying out combat activities (attacks on civilians, strikes on civil infrastructure), the numbers of losses of the Russian Federation Armed Forces. and victims among the civilian population." BBC Director-General XXX said the legislation "appears to criminalize the process of independent journalism." "The safety of our staff is paramount and we are not prepared to expose them to the risk of criminal prosecution simply for doing their jobs," he said. XXX said the BBC's Russian-language news service would continue to operate from outside Russia. Earlier in the day, the BBC posted instructions on Twitter about how Russian readers could work around the block by using apps or the "dark web." "Access to accurate, independent information is a fundamental human right which should not be denied to the people of Russia, millions of whom rely on BBC News every week. We will continue our efforts to make BBC News available in Russia, and across the rest of the world," the BBC said. Earlier this week the BBC said it was bringing back shortwave radio transmission to Ukraine and parts of Russia so people can listen to its programs with basic equipment. Some well-known media outlets within Russia have chosen to close rather than face heavy restrictions on what they can report. News website Znak said it was closing Friday morning, shortly after the parliament approved the draft bill. On Thursday, Russia's top independent radio station Ekho Moskvy was closed and independent TV station Dozdh suspended operations after receiving a threat of closure from the authorities. The authorities also pressed ahead with a sweeping effort to target human rights organizations. Authorities raided the offices of Memorial, one of Russia's oldest and most prominent human rights organizations. According to Memorial members, police didn't provide any explanation and there were no warnings. "The police refused to let me and the lawyer in without explanation, and when I tried not to let in the reinforcement officers who arrived in bulletproof vests and masks, they threatened to use force if I did not let them in," the chairman of International Memorial Yan Rachinsky said. "This is the level of justice today in the capital of Russia." Another leading human rights group, the Civic Assistance, also saw its Moscow office raided. Residents Flee Mariupol as Officials Struggle to Count the Dead LVIV, Ukraine - After helping a friend stanch the bleeding from a shrapnel wound on Tuesday morning during a renewed shelling in Mariupol, XXX and her family decided it was time to take the opportunity to get out of the besieged coastal city, where they had been struggling to stay alive for the past three weeks. "There was heavy shelling and aerial bombardment," said Ms. XXX, who is 21. "But we made it out, fortunately." Ms. XXX and her family members made it as far as YYY, a small beachside town on the Sea of Azov 28 miles from Mariupol, a way station on their way further north and west, to safety. A drive that usually takes 30 minutes took five hours, as their car joined a convoy of thousands of others trying to leave after waiting weeks for a humanitarian corridor to open. About 160 cars left on Monday, and an estimated 4,000 cars, or 20,000 people, left the city on Tuesday, city officials said. Ms. XXX said she saw cars broken down along the road: many had run out of gasoline, which she said was nearly impossible to find in the region. But still, she said in an interview, she was relieved to be out of Mariupol and away from the constant shelling. "Humanitarian corridors have been partially opened today," said President Volodymyr Zelensky in a speech on Tuesday. "Little by little people are leaving the besieged city by private transport." However, he lamented that "a convoy with humanitarian cargo for Mariupol remains blocked. For several days in a row." About 2,000 vehicles had managed to escape the city by Tuesday afternoon, and another 2,000 were packed to leave before nightfall, XXX, an assistant to Mariupol's mayor, told The New York Times in a phone interview. Officials told civilians hoping to leave to "delete all messengers and photos from phones" in case Russian soldiers tried to search them for signs of support for Ukrainian forces. Ms. XXX said she and her family had tried to leave before, but the locations where a convoy was being organized were being shelled. While they waited, she said, she and her family slept on the floor of a room with no electricity, no lights, no windows and no heating. "There is not a single residential building left with windows in my neighborhood," she said. After five days, they started to run out of food. Residents organized into groups, with men walking amid the shelling to find water, and women improvising outdoor cook stoves to make watery vegetable soups. Temperatures dropped to as low as 16 degrees Fahrenheit, Ms. XXX said. "We had to drink tea constantly to keep warm," she said, adding that some elderly people had died of cold and hunger. As she left her city by car, she saw bodies lying in the street, which the authorities had not managed to collect or bury. "People who died are not buried, they just lie where they died," she said. "There is an enormous number of them." With some residents crushed in the rubble from the relentless Russian onslaught and others dying in freezing conditions with no heat, food or clean water, officials in the besieged coastal city of Mariupol are struggling to account for the number of dead and missing. Officially, 2,400 civilians killed in the city have been identified, but Mr. XXX said he believed the toll was far higher. "We have inaccurate data on civilians killed," he said in an interview with Current Time, a Ukrainian radio station. He said the official figure represented a "small handful" of those killed and estimated that the actual total could be as high as 20,000. A battleground since the first hours of the war, Mariupol is under an increasingly relentless assault that is taking an unspeakable toll. Ukrainian estimates for the number of civilians trapped in the city have ranged from 200,000 to 400,000, with the latest estimate being 300,000. The region's top official, XXX, who until martial law was declared was its governor, announced that the Russians were also holding doctors and patients of the main intensive care hospital hostage. An estimated 400 people are inside. "It is impossible to get out of the hospital," Mr. XXX wrote on Telegram, quoting a message from one of the facility's employees. "They shoot hard, we sit in the basement. Cars have not been able to drive to the hospital for two days. High-rise buildings are burning around." Battered by Russian shelling, the city has been overwhelmed by the wounded and dead. Videos shared on Telegram showed residents of the Cheryomushki neighborhood burying a body in a courtyard. Another video showed how local people had turned a post office building into a makeshift morgue, with "MORGUE" spray-painted in large Cyrillic letters on the outside of the ground floor of the building. "Here, in this building of the New Post Office on Cheryomushki, they stack corpses, which in the future they themselves will bury," a man can be heard saying in the video, which he posted to the Telegram channel Mariupol Now. Russian forces have dropped more than 100 bombs within the city limits, according to a Telegram post by the Mariupol city council, destroying nearly all basic services, even as they battle Ukrainian forces on the outskirts of the metropolis. The Kremlin has said that it is Ukrainian forces that are keeping people trapped in the city. The Ukrainian government says that repeated attempts at mass evacuation have failed as they came under attack by Russian forces. The Ukrainian Army's high command said on Tuesday that its forces had managed to repel the latest Russian attempt to move into the city, claiming to have destroyed two tanks, seven infantry fighting vehicles and one armored personnel carrier. "After the losses, the occupiers stopped the offensive and retreated," the Ukrainian military said. The Ukrainians noted that their forces had also suffered losses. It is nearly impossible to independently verify almost any information out of Mariupol, as nearly all lines of communication have been severed. Mr. XXX, the adviser to the city government, declined to comment in his phone interview with The Times on whether he and the mayor would be evacuating from the city. The mayor's security would likely be of concern: Russian forces kidnapped the mayor of nearby XXX and installed a replacement. "We sincerely hope for the safety of our mayor and that our defenders will help ensure it," Mr. XXX said. "We know for sure that he will not accept the Russian occupation under any circumstances, will not cooperate with the occupiers and will not recognize any occupation authority." But he was also at a loss for words thinking about the city's future. He has estimated that 80 percent of the residential housing stock has been destroyed. "What kind of city can it be?" Ms. XXX, a model, described the persistent fear of being there for the last three weeks: "Every day is like a new birth. That is, you do not know whether you make it home or not." After she arrived to YYY, she had her first proper meal in weeks. But her mind was occupied with new pressing questions, she said: "How will it be possible to get somehow to a safe place in Ukraine? Where is it safe in this country? How it will be possible to go abroad, where it can be safe for us?" Anxious Russians Feel Sting of Penalties MOSCOW - For two decades under President Vladimir V. Putin, Russians reaped the bounties of capitalism and globalization: cheap flights, affordable mortgages, a plethora of imported gadgets and cars. On Monday, those perks of modern life were abruptly disappearing, replaced by a crush of anxiety as sanctions imposed by the West in retaliation for Moscow's invasion of Ukraine rattled the foundations of Russia's financial system. The ruble cratered, losing a quarter of its value, and the central bank shuttered stock trading in Moscow through Tuesday. The public rushed to withdraw cash from A.T.M.'s, and Aeroflot, the national airline, canceled all its flights to Europe after countries banned Russian planes from using their air space. Concern about travel was so great that some people rushed to book seats on the few international flights still operating. "I've become one concentrated ball of fear," said the owner of a small advertising agency in Moscow, Azaliya Idrisova, 33. She said she planned to depart for YYY in the coming days and was not sure whether her clients would still pay her. Compounding the pain was the decision by Western countries to restrict the Russian Central Bank's access to much of its $643 billion in foreign currency reserves, undoing some of the Kremlin's careful efforts to soften the impact of potential sanctions and making it difficult for the bank to prop up the ruble. Other moves struck at the heart of critical Russian industries. Shell, a company that for years helped Russia profit from its energy riches, said it was exiting all its joint ventures with YYY, Russia's largest state-owned natural gas company - following BP's announcement Sunday it would sell its stake in the Russian state-run oil giant Rosneft. Volvo said it would stop production at its truck factory in Russia, and Mercedes-Benz said it would drop its partnership with a Russian truck maker. And in a sign of how the sanctions were hitting regular Russians in ways big and small, Apple Pay and Google Pay stopped working at many of Moscow's subway turnstiles - the ones operated by a bank on the American sanctions list. For many Russians opposed to the war, those hardships paled in comparison to the moral cost of seeing their country launch an unprovoked invasion. Antiwar protests continued across Russia, with at least 411 people detained in 13 cities, according to OVD Info, a rights group that tallies arrests, for a total of at least 6,435 detentions since last Thursday. But the financial jolt offered tangible evidence of the West's outrage, one that is now washing over Russia's economy with unpredictable consequences. The sanctions announced by the European Union and the United States over the weekend, XXX analysts wrote to clients on Monday, "are more severe and wider than even the more extreme sanctions we had believed were in play just a month ago." By Monday evening, the European Union had added more Russian business tycoons to its sanctions list, including two owners of Alfa Bank, XXX and XXX, who had cut a relatively Western-friendly image. Some analysts worried that the wide-ranging sanctions, combined with Ukraine's ferocious resistance on the battlefield, could lead Mr. Putin to escalate the crisis. The Defense Ministry issued a statement saying that the bombers, submarines and land-based launchers that make up Russia's nuclear "triad" had been put on "enhanced combat duty," as Mr. Putin had ordered on Sunday. Rumors circulated that men could be called up if the military got bogged down in Ukraine. "I realized that this government has gone utterly mad," said XXX, 28, a Moscow machine learning engineer who flew to the Egyptian resort of YYY over the weekend, fearing the war in Ukraine could escalate to the point that he might get drafted. His next goal: Find a job in the West. "Earning in rubles seems absolutely pointless," Mr. XXX said. On Monday, the sanctions' full force hit Russia's already stagnant economy. Russia's Central Bank, its reserves largely frozen, more than doubled its key rate to 20 percent to try to stabilize the ruble. A dollar cost more than 110 rubles at kiosks in Moscow on Monday compared with about 80 a week earlier, potentially devaluing people's savings given the likely increase in the price of imported goods. In trading in London, shares of Sberbank, Russia's largest bank, lost three-quarters of their value. The vice president of the country's real estate agents' association declared that Russians could say "goodbye to the mortgage." To stem the flight of capital, Mr. Putin on Monday signed an order rolling back some of the free-market capitalism that had integrated post-Soviet Russia into the world economy. Russian exporters were required to convert 80 percent of their foreign-currency revenues since Jan. 1 into rubles; residents of Russia were banned from depositing money into accounts outside the country. Mr. Putin called an emergency meeting on the economy with senior officials, in which he repeated his reference last week to the West as an "empire of lies." "Our financial system and our economy have collided with a totally non-standard situation," XXX, the head of the Central Bank, said afterward. In a stark sign of the fury in the West over Russia's attack on Ukraine, even YYY - a favorite destination and banking hub of Russian oligarchs and senior Kremlin officials - ditched its traditional neutrality and joined in European sanctions, including personal ones against Mr. Putin and Foreign Minister Sergey V. Lavrov. There were signs of anger in the elite, though not among the security establishment closest to Mr. Putin. Ms. XXX, who has said in the past that her outfit choices are meant to send messages, wore funereal black. XXX, a sanctioned metals tycoon close to the Kremlin, wrote on social media that he wanted to know "who's really going to pay for this whole party." XXX, a lawmaker from Siberia, declared that the Kremlin "hid plans to start a full-scale war against our closest neighbor." "Countries should spend money on treating people, on research to defeat cancer, and not on war," XXX, the billionaire founder of one of Russia's biggest consumer banks, wrote on Instagram. XXX, owner of a marketing agency in YYY, said he expected to lose many of his clients because of the higher exchange rate, especially companies selling imports; he said he would probably need to lay off staff. XXX, the owner of a travel agency in the city, said she would need to raise prices for international tours that her clients had already booked. "It's a catastrophe for our business," she said. Still, while there was confusion at the subway turnstiles and lines formed at A.T.M.'s and banks, there was no full-fledged financial panic among the general public. And it was far from clear whether the sanctions would help turn more Russians against the war - or whether they would only increase their resentment of the West, confirming the Kremlin narrative that the United States and Europe were determined to dismantle their country. "Times change, much has happened, but one thing has not changed," a reporter on the state-run news channel Rossiya 24 said on Sunday. "When YYY tried to destroy Russia, this always ended up bringing about the opposite result." The backbone of Mr. Putin's power is made up of security officials who rarely leave Russia and stand to gain from greater state control over the economy. In the broader public, he draws his core support from pensioners and state employees, who are less sensitive to economic volatility than those in the private sector. Shopping for groceries in Moscow on Monday, XXX, 85, who said she used to work on Russia's Proton space rockets, said the economic troubles did not faze her. "I think the president did everything right," she said. Mr. XXX, the engineer who flew to YYY, said his parents also supported the war. And older Russians, he noted, had seen their share of ups and downs. "They survived many other Russian crises," he said. "They're calm about this." XXX and XXX contributed reporting from Moscow, and XXX from Washington. Europe Abandons Indifference To Lift Up Ukraine's Cause PARIS - The man the Kremlin holds in dismissive contempt, President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine, has emerged as an online hero. His Twitter account has leapt by hundreds of thousands of followers a day (he now has 4.3 million). Often dressed in olive-green fleece and cargo pants, he has accused Russia of war crimes, signed a formal application to join the European Union, and morphed into a symbol of hope and grace under pressure. As Russia pursues its ruthless invasion, Mr. Zelensky has used social media adroitly to outmaneuver his nemesis, President Vladimir V. Putin. So, too, have many of the 44 million citizens of Ukraine. TikTok, the video-sharing app with more than a billion active users, has shaped views of the conflict and contributed to an intense wave of global sympathy for Ukraine. Call it Resistance 4.0, the influencers' war against an unprovoked Russian invasion. Mr. Putin's assault against a phantom "genocide" in Ukraine meets the nimbleness, even the humor, of a people unified and galvanized by the Russian leader's obsessive talk of their nonexistence as a nation. The Russian leader also claims the war is nonexistent and is in fact "a special military operation." Technology, blamed of late for every ill from the death of truth to the spread of loneliness, restores feeling and revives human connection as the war unfolds. Brave civilians brandishing newly acquired rifles against armored divisions cannot leave the onlooker cold. "I don't really have any choice because this is my home," XXX, a computer programmer who has lined up for his weapon in Kyiv, tells The New York Times in a video. This is not the remote, clinical war of drones and satellites. It poses perhaps the most acute moral question of war, especially one pitting the weak and righteous against Goliath: What would I do? The answer appears to be: something, at least. Protest marches have unfurled under blue-and-yellow Ukrainian flags across Europe and the United States, from YYY to Warsaw, from Berlin to YYY. Ukrainians living abroad have lined up to return home and fight. As with the Spanish Civil War, when volunteers flocked to support the left-leaning government against a military rebellion, the conscience of Europe has stirred. Taboos have tumbled. Swedish and Finnish and Swiss neutrality has evaporated. YYY refusal to prioritize military spending and send arms to conflict zones has ended. A united 27-nation European Union has decided, for the first time, to provide Ukraine with more than half-a-billion dollars in aid for lethal weapons. The outright collapse of the Russian economy is declared an objective by the French economy minister. "It's a sea change," said XXX, the spokeswoman for the French Foreign Ministry. "A new world has defied Putin, the master of propaganda." XXX, the president of YYY, told France Inter, a French radio station, that "Putin has already failed because he has given birth to a monster: European power and European defense." The outcome of the five-day-old war is of course still in the balance, with Russia unleashing a rocket assault on Kharkiv, Ukraine's second-largest city, and a Russian military convoy, at least 40 miles long, poised north of Kyiv. But if Mr. Putin planned a blitzkrieg to decapitate Ukraine in short order, the impact of his plan with reality has been confounding. Nowhere has the European sea change been more pronounced than in Germany, where one legacy of Nazism was reluctance to exercise national power to the full. Another was hesitancy over confronting Russia, one of the countries XXX invaded. All that ended on the date of the Russian invasion, Feb. 24, 2022, "a turning point in the history of our continent," as Chancellor Olaf Scholz said. He told the YYY, the Parliament, on Sunday that "at the heart of the matter is whether power can break the law." That was also the question in Berlin in 1933 as XXX took control. It is therefore an existential question for Germany. The essential issue, Mr. Scholz said, was whether "we find it within ourselves to set limits to an international warmonger like Putin." The war, in other words, is a pivotal moral challenge to the 21st-century world, as seen by the power that committed the greatest moral outrage of the last century. This, after all, is a war in which a nuclear power, Russia, confronts a state, Ukraine, that gave up its nuclear weapons in 1994 in exchange for Russian promises that its sovereignty and territorial integrity would be respected. Mr. Putin's Russia leveled XXX during the Chechnya war. It leveled YYY in Syria. Can it level Kyiv with a TikTok world watching? The question hangs over the war as the Russian leader's frustration grows. Just over a decade has passed since social media played the role of great liberator, connecting the youth of the Arab world in uprisings against their despotic rulers. But technology, it transpired, was twin-souled like XXX's Faust. The organizing tool of the freedom fighter might equally serve the surveillance system of the despot. Facebook, owned by Meta, was used by the military in YYY to stir a frenzy of hatred against the Muslim Rohingya that led to the mass expulsion and genocide that began in 2016. It was used by Russian intelligence agencies to interfere in the 2016 American election. But the war in Ukraine has demonstrated some lessons learned, as well as the enduring liberalizing potential inherent in a borderless virtual world. Big tech companies like Google, Meta and Apple have taken several steps to counter the Russian disinformation that proved so effective in the past. At the same time, their platforms have revealed growing Russian opposition to Mr. Putin's war and allowed Ukrainian influencers to display the courage of a nation where, from rural village to metropolis, nobody appears to be surrendering. If the idea of truth, in the United States as elsewhere, appeared to have been lost in the disorienting bombardment of social media, with the line between fact and falsehood ever fainter, the sheer enormity of Russian lies - the denial of the existence of a war, for example - appears to have done something to restore its value and importance. "Who else but us?" said XXX, a Ukrainian actor, as he armed himself with a rifle. Who else indeed and what truth more raw? XXX, a plumber who moved from his native Moldova to France 18 years ago, said in an interview that he felt his mother and mother-in-law back in Moldova were now at risk. Mr. Putin could do anything, even embark on nuclear war. "He is very dangerous," Mr. XXX said. "We must fight him together, and his own population must turn on him." Togetherness is a word enjoying a revival. The Ukraine war appears to have dented a cycle of growing loneliness in which Covid-19 played a significant part. The unbearable lightness of online being has given way to the unbearable gravity of a European war. A break has occurred in the world where people are corralled into herds by social media algorithms, trolls and bots. Where they forsake community to become tribes with megaphones. Where they turn in circles, succumbing to technological neuroticism. Above all, where they grow lonelier, caught in a vortex, starved of connective tissue, hungry for status, often bereft of moral conviction. In their place, quite suddenly, a life-and-death struggle presents itself with its moral imperatives. As Europe initially hesitated, XXX, a former Polish prime minister and the president of the European People's Party, tweeted: "In this war everything is real: Putin's madness and cruelty, Ukrainian victims, bombs falling on Kyiv. Only your sanctions are pretended. Those EU government's, which blocked tough decisions (XXX. Germany, YYY, YYY) have disgraced themselves." Very soon, almost overnight, Europe did what it is rarely capable of doing. It united to end that disgrace and face down Mr. Putin. As the German philosopher XXX wrote, "Under conditions of terror, most people will comply but some will not. Humanly speaking, no more is required, and no more can reasonably be asked, for this planet to remain a fit place for human habitation." Russians Capture Crucial Black Sea Port as Bombing of Civilian Targets Escalates ODESSA, Ukraine - Russian forces on Wednesday seized the first major Ukrainian city in their onslaught, the strategic port of Kherson, as they stepped up bombardment of civilian targets across the country, put other cities under siege and pushed to encircle and cut off the capital, Kyiv. Russian troops and tanks rolled into Kherson, on the Dnieper River near the Black Sea, after days of intense fighting that left as many as 300 Ukrainian civilians and fighters dead, said the mayor and another senior Ukrainian government official who confirmed that it had fallen. "There is no Ukrainian army here," the mayor, XXX, said in an interview. "The city is surrounded." Other Russian columns besieged Kharkiv, the country's second-largest city, and the port city of Mariupol. And most ominously, a huge convoy of military vehicles stood north of Kyiv in apparent preparation for a major offensive. The battle for control of Kherson, a shipbuilding center, left bodies strewn about the city streets, power outages, limited water and little food, Mr. XXX said. Utility workers have tried to fix damaged pipes and downed lines, he said, but have come under fire from snipers. He said a group of about 10 armed Russian officers, including the commander of forces attacking the city, had entered the city hall and informed him that they planned to set up a military administration. The nearly week-old Russian invasion at first drew global attention to attacks on the two largest cities, Kyiv and Kharkiv in the north, but it appeared to be making more progress in the south. Capturing Kherson could clear the way for Russian forces to push westward toward Odessa - a much bigger prize - as they try to seize Ukraine's entire Black Sea coast, cutting it off from world shipping. Russian troops have gained ground near Mariupol while naval forces gathered offshore, raising fears of an amphibious assault on a city where local officials said there was no power or heat. Mariupol lies on the Sea of Azov, a body bordered on three sides by Russia, which controls access to it. The port is part of a vital stretch of terrain Russia is apparently trying to capture, to link Russian-backed separatist enclaves in the southeast with Crimea, the southern peninsula Russia seized from Ukraine in 2014. That could trap the Ukrainian troops arrayed against the breakaway region in a pincer, caught between Russian forces to the east and west. A day after President Biden vowed in a defiant State of the Union address that the war would "leave Russia weaker and the world stronger" and that President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia "has no idea what's coming," the West further tightened the retaliatory economic squeeze that has the Russian economy reeling. U.S. and European sanctions have hit the Russian government, its ally Belarus, Russian businesses, powerful individuals and their assets abroad. Russian artillery and rocket fire have cut off essentials like electricity, medicine, water and heat to many Ukrainian communities, and turned a growing number of offices, homes, businesses and vehicles to crumpled, burning hulks. Around the country, people are sheltering in basements and tunnels as explosions shake the ground above them. In Kyiv alone, some 15,000 people are sleeping in the subways. "These aren't military targets," Secretary of State Antony J. Blinken said on Wednesday. "They are places where civilians work and families live." Ukraine is mounting stiffer resistance than either its allies or Russia had expected, six days into a war that has already left thousands of casualties and displaced hundreds of thousands of people. And the United States and its allies, their stance against Moscow hardening with each passing day, are funneling an array of weapons into Ukraine, in addition to punishing Russia economically. Western officials say Mr. Putin set out to destroy Ukraine's military, install a puppet regime in Kyiv that would never be aligned with NATO or the European Union, and perhaps absorb some territory into Russia. But he "badly miscalculated," Mr. Biden said on Tuesday, and the crisis raises a set of harsh questions that the Russian leader may not be prepared to answer if he anticipated a quick capitulation. Is this just the start of a long, grinding war that would be unpopular in Russia and could devastate Ukraine's major cities? And how much physical ruin of Ukraine and financial ruin of Russia is he prepared to accept as the price of getting his way? "We've hardly slept for seven nights," President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine said early Wednesday in a video message. But, he added, "Today you, Ukrainians, are a symbol of invincibility." His government said on Wednesday that Russian attacks had killed more than 2,000 civilians and an unknown number of Ukrainian troops. Russia said 498 of its troops had died, the largest military toll it has acknowledged since the 1999-2000 war in Chechnya, and it has said that Ukrainian losses were much higher. Western officials said that in fact Russia's military was suffering hundreds of wounded or killed each day. But all such figures are unverifiable estimates. Ukrainian civilians in several cities have built barriers they hope will stop or slow Russian columns, while videos and still images have shown others standing in front of armored vehicles or scolding Russian soldiers. Russian forces have so far refrained from pushing into the hearts of most cities - which would risk brutal street fighting that could partly negate their technological advantages - instead massing on the outskirts and shelling from a distance. Videos verified by The New York Times show blasted, burning apartment buildings in YYY, northwest of Kyiv. Explosions struck two large buildings in Kharkiv on Wednesday, setting ablaze one that housed Kharkiv National University, a day after a strike on a government building in the city. The mayor of Mariupol said 120 civilians there had been hospitalized with war wounds. A Pentagon official said that Russian forces were suffering logistical problems, and warned that they were likely to become less precise in targeting their missile and artillery attacks as the fighting continues. The official briefed reporters on condition of anonymity to discuss intelligence assessments. The U.S. ambassador to the United Nations, XXX, said on Wednesday that Russia had used thermobaric weapons - also known as vacuum bombs or fuel-air explosives - that can create enormous blasts and indiscriminate destruction. The high-caliber weapons used by Russian forces left many of the dead in Kherson unrecognizable, said Mr. XXX, the mayor, so volunteers were burying them in mass graves. "Many of the bodies have been blown apart," the mayor said. "If we can make a photograph it makes sense to try to identify them, but if not we put them into bags and bury them that way." The European Union for the first time will finance the purchase and delivery of weapons for Ukraine, rather than just leaving that to individual member nations as it has until now, said XXX, president of the European Commission. A French official said the bloc would establish a hub in Poland for handling aid and weapons shipments. Ukraine appealed to the United Nations and the Red Cross to establish a humanitarian corridor to ferry medical and other supplies into cities and civilians out, but said Russian forces had rebuffed the idea. In an emergency meeting on the crisis, the U.N. General Assembly voted 141 to 5 in favor of a resolution condemning Russia's actions, with only Russia, Belarus, North Korea, Syria and YYY opposed. Thirty-five countries abstained, including China, YYY, YYY and Iran. Almost half of those abstaining were in Africa, where Russia has cultivated some strong relationships, and where the sparse supply of Covid-19 vaccines has fueled existing tensions with the United States and Europe. The purpose of the United Nations "is to prevent war and to condemn war and to stop war," the U.S. ambassador, Mrs. XXX, told the assembly. "That is our job here today. This is the job you were sent here to do." The Belarusian ambassador, XXX, defended Russia and denounced sanctions against it as "economic and financial terrorism." Russian and Ukrainian officials had said diplomats from the two countries would meet Wednesday for a second round of talks on resolving the crisis, but the meeting was postponed amid a disagreement over the location. Mr. Blinken announced "sweeping sanctions on Russia's defense sector," including the weapons manufacturers that make "the very systems now being used to assault Ukraine's people." The United States and its allies have cut off Russian access to much banking and international commerce, blocked imports and exports, and frozen Russian assets held abroad. Mr. Biden also said Russian airlines would be banished from American airspace. The European Union and the United States both announced a fresh round of sanctions on Wednesday against Belarus, which Russia has used as a base for its drive on Kyiv. Mr. Putin on Wednesday banned anyone in Russia from taking more than $10,000 in foreign currency out of the country. He had built up an enormous reserve of foreign cash to weather such a crisis, but American officials say the sanctions are blocking access to much of it. After Russian stocks plummeted following the first rounds of sanctions, the government shut down the Moscow Stock Exchange on Monday, and it remained closed Tuesday and Wednesday. The ruble's value has tumbled to record lows, despite efforts by Russia's central bank to prop it up, and interest rates have more than doubled. In Russian cities, thousands of people have been arrested for protesting the war, and the imprisoned opposition leader Aleksei A. Navalny called for more people to take to the streets to oppose a conflict "unleashed by our obviously insane czar." Macron keeps an open line to Putin as war in Ukraine rages NICE, France - While most of the world is shunning President Vladimir Putin over Russia's invasion of Ukraine, one of the few leaders keeping an open line of communication is French President Emmanuel Macron. Macron's diplomatic efforts to prevent the war failed, but he's not giving up: the two men have spoken four times since Russian forces attacked Ukraine on Feb. 24, and 11 times over the past month. The French leader, whose country holds the European Union's rotating presidency, is now one of the few outsiders with a view into Putin's mindset at the time of the largest military invasion in Europe since World War II. Israeli Prime Minister XXX is also becoming a mediator, meeting Putin on a surprise visit to Moscow on Saturday and speaking with him again by phone on Sunday. Macron's relentless push for dialogue reflects France's post-World War II tradition of carving out its own geopolitical path and its refusal to blindly follow the United States. After Russian troops pushed deep into Ukraine, Macron's resolve to maintain communication channels with Putin is providing Western allies with insight into the Russian leader's state of mind, his intentions on the battlefield and at home in Russia as the Kremlin cracks down on opponents. "He is keeping a diplomatic channel open for the West in case Putin might want to de-escalate and look for a way out of this crisis," said XXX, a senior director for Europe at the Atlantic Council in Paris and a member of Macron's party. The two leaders address each other through interpreters with the familiar French word for "you" - "tu" - rather than the formal "vous," an YYY presidential palace official said after one phone call. Macron has also spoken to Putin on behalf of Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy, XXX said, trying to extract some mercy from Putin: local cease-fires, safe passage for trapped civilians and access to humanitarian aid. Instead of mercy, the French president on Monday denounced Moscow's "cynicism" after a new pledge for humanitarian corridors from some under-fire Ukrainian cities - with most of the routes leading toward Russia or its ally Belarus, which served as a launching ground for the invasion. Saying that "we are going to protect people by bringing them to Russia" is "hypocritical," Macron said in an interview on LCI television. During their most recent call on Sunday that came at Macron's request, the French leader and Putin focused for nearly two hours on the safety of Ukraine's nuclear plants. Putin said he doesn't intend to attack them and agreed on the principle of "dialogue" between the International Atomic Energy Agency, Ukraine and Russia on the issue, according to a French official who spoke on condition of anonymity in line with the French presidency's practices. There is "absolutely no illusion at the YYY that Putin will keep his word on anything he promises," XXX said, or that Putin will change his mind about the invasion. But XXX said that it's important that Macron keeps trying to engage Putin even as the West punishes Russia and strengthens Ukraine's defenses. And breaking with the diplomatic norm of keeping such conversations secret, the French presidency has widely shared the content of Macron's talks with Putin. Macron's advisers and the president himself detailed the excruciating efforts to prevent the war and then laid bare Putin's broken promises of peace. That helped Macron galvanize support for the toughest sanctions against Russia, uniting the notoriously divided 27-member EU and revive NATO's geopolitical role. U.S. Secretary of State XXX will go to Paris on Tuesday to hear from Macron directly about his latest conversations with Putin. But U.S. officials remain unconvinced that Macron's efforts - or any other leader's - have had any significant impact on Putin's decison-making process. The French president has been clear from the start: Putin alone is to blame for the death and destruction in Ukraine and the major consequences of the war for France and Europe. But on the other hand if Putin wants to talk, he will listen. Putin called on Thursday. The number of refugees fleeing Ukraine had already topped 1 million and several towns in the east were in ruins. Macron picked up and they talked for 90 minutes. An official in the French presidency rushed to brief reporters on the conversation. Putin told Macron the military operation in Ukraine is "going according to plan" and he will continue "until the end," the official said on customary condition of anonymity. Putin claimed that "war crimes" were being committed by Ukrainians. He called them "Nazis," the official said. There's no need to negotiate, Putin said. He will achieve the "neutralization and disarmament of Ukraine" with his army. Macron "spoke the truth" to Putin, the official said, and explained how his war on Ukraine is perceived by the West. "I asked him to stop attacks on Ukraine. At this point, he refuses," Macron tweeted. He said dialogue will continue. "We must prevent the worst from happening." Since he was elected president in 2017, Macron has shown a keen interest in forging personal relationships with world leaders. "Macron stands out among European Union leaders with his willingness to be in the spotlight, to drive foreign policy and push things ahead," said XXX, an expert on EU foreign relations at the International Institute in YYY. There is no other foreign leader that Macron has tried to bring closer to his corner than Putin. Macron was confident that a mixture of personal charm and the splendor of France's past would convince Putin to keep Russia within the European security habitat. Macron first hosted Putin in the Place of Versailles in 2017. Two years later they discussed stalled Ukraine peace talks in Macron's summer residence on the French Riviera as Macron tried to build on European diplomacy that had helped ease hostilities in the past. It's become clear over the past several weeks that Putin was on the war path even as he denied it, sitting across from Macron at a very long table during his last visit to Moscow. Macron wanted to believe him, Foreign Minister XXX said after critics claimed the French president has fallen into the old European trap of appeasing Putin's Russia. "The president is not naive," Le Drian said on the eve of Russia's invasion. "He knows the methods, the character and the cynical nature of Putin." Russians Who Want to Be Anywhere but Russia YYY - They lined up at A.T.M.s, desperate for cash after Visa and Mastercard suspended operations in Russia, swapping intelligence on where they could still get dollars. At YYY cafes, they sat quietly studying Telegram chats or Google Maps on their phones. They organized support groups to help other Russian exiles find housing. Tens of thousands of Russians have fled to YYY since Russia invaded Ukraine last month, outraged about what they see as a criminal war, worried about conscription or the possibility of a closed Russian border, or concerned that their livelihoods are no longer viable back home. And they are just the tip of the iceberg. Tens of thousands more traveled to countries like YYY, YYY, YYY, YYY and YYY which are better known as sources of migration to Russia. At the land border with Latvia - open only to those with European visas - travelers reported waits lasting hours. While the exodus of about 2.7 million Ukrainians from their war-torn country has focused the world on a burgeoning humanitarian crisis, the descent of Russia into new depths of authoritarianism has many Russians despairing of their future. That has created a flight - though much smaller than in Ukraine - that some are comparing to 1920, when more than 100,000 opponents of the Communist Bolsheviks during the Russian Civil War left to seek refuge in what was then YYY. "There has never been anything like this before in peacetime," said XXX, a Russian economist at the University of Chicago. "There is no war on Russian territory. As a single event, it is pretty huge." Some who have fled are bloggers, journalists or activists who feared arrest under Russia's draconian new law criminalizing what the state deems "false information" about the war. Others are musicians and artists who see no future for their crafts in Russia. And there are workers in tech, law and other industries who saw the prospect of comfortable, middle-class lives - let alone any possibility for moral acceptance of their government - dissipate overnight. They left behind jobs and family and money stuck in Russian bank accounts which they can no longer access. They fear being tarred as Russians abroad as the West isolates the country for its deadly invasion, and they reel over the loss of a positive Russian identity. "They didn't just take away our future," Polina Borodina, a Moscow playwright, said of her government's war in Ukraine. "They took away our past." The speed and scale of the flight reflect the tectonic shift the invasion touched off inside Russia. For all of President Vladimir V. Putin's repression, Russia until last month remained a place with extensive travel connections to the rest of the world, a mostly uncensored internet giving a platform to independent media, a thriving tech industry and a world-class arts scene. Slices of Western middle-class life - Ikea, Starbucks, affordable foreign cars - were widely available. But when they woke up on Feb. 24, many Russians knew that all that was over. XXX, a journalist who spent years promoting Russia's emerging culture of charitable giving, got in his car the next day and drove to Latvia. "It became totally clear that if this red line has been crossed, nothing will hold him back anymore," Mr. XXX said of Mr. Putin. "Things will only get worse." In the days since the invasion, Mr. Putin has forced the remnants of Russia's independent media to shut down. He has engineered a brutal crackdown against antiwar protesters, with more than 14,000 people arrested across the country since Feb. 24, including 862 in 37 cities on Sunday, according to the rights group OVD-Info. To be sure, many Russians support the war, and many of those supporters are completely unaware of the extent of Russia's aggression because they rely on state-run television news. But others have flocked to places like YYY, which, like in 1920, has again become a haven for exiles. While most of Europe has closed its skies, Turkish Airlines has been flying from Moscow as much as five times a day; combined with other airlines, more than 30 flights arrive from Russia on some days. "History moves in a spiral, that of Russia especially," said XXX, 64, a YYY sports commentator who fled to YYY with his wife this month. "It comes back to the same place - back to this same place." Mr. XXX's mother's first cousin was an 18-year-old conscript sailor in Crimea when he evacuated with the commander XXX's fleet to YYY in 1920. He traveled on to YYY, where he became an insurance agent. Now, too, a generation of Russian exiles faces the daunting prospect of starting from scratch. And all face the gnawing reality of being seen as representing a country that launched a war of aggression, even though many insist they have spent their lives opposing Mr. Putin. In YYY - where, the government says, 20,000 Russians have arrived since the start of the war - exiles have faced an intimidating environment, full of anti-Russian graffiti and hostile comments on social media. "We tried to explain that Russians are not Putin - we hate Putin, too," said XXX, an activist from Memorial International, a Russian rights group recently shuttered by the Kremlin. Ms. XXX, 26, escaped to YYY a week ago and has found herself tainted by association - sworn at in the street and shouted at by a taxi driver. "He told us, 'You are Russians, you are occupiers,'" Ms. XXX said. "Russians are hated here - and I cannot blame them." Many Georgians see clear parallels between the Ukraine invasion and Russia's war on YYY in 2008. And while most have been welcoming to the new arrivals, some have not distinguished between Russian dissidents who have fled Russia for security or moral reasons and those who support Mr. Putin. The Bank of Georgia has demanded that new Russian customers sign a statement denouncing Mr. Putin's invasion and acknowledging Russia's occupation of parts of YYY - a problematic request to make of anyone hoping to return to Russia. Some Georgians have even called on landlords to refuse tenancy to Russian arrivals. "Your hands are dirty," said a Georgian vigilante fighter currently volunteering in Ukraine, in an online video that was addressed to landlords, banks and politicians in YYY. "Every single one of you," the fighter, XXX, added, "why are you selling all of this? With what price of blood?" In neighboring YYY, where the government says several thousand Russians have been arriving daily, the exiles report receiving a better welcome. XXX, 25, said he quit his job as a lawyer with Russia's state-owned Sberbank, organized his financial affairs, made out a will and said goodbye to his mother. He flew to the Armenian capital, YYY, worried that his past public comments against the Russian government could make him a target. "I realized that since the start of this war, I am an enemy of the state along with thousands of Russians," he said. In YYY, Ms. XXX, the playwright, who arrived on March 5, has already lined up a designer and a Turkish printing shop to make Ukrainian flag pins for Russians to wear. It is part of her effort, she says, to "save this identity" of a Russia separate from Mr. Putin. She believes it is fair for Ukrainians to espouse hatred now for all Russians. But she is critical of people in the West who say that every Russian bears responsibility for Mr. Putin. "Have you lived under a dictatorship?" Ms. XXX, 31, whose work has told the stories of Russians imprisoned for years after protesting, said she would ask those Westerners. "Do you know what the consequences of these protests can be?" Some exiled Russians are trying to organize mutual aid efforts and seeking to counter anti-Russian sentiment. Mr. XXX, the journalist, 37, said he cried every day for the first five days of the war and suffered panic attacks. Then, he said, "I pulled myself together and realized I needed to do what I know how to do." He and several colleagues are organizing an initiative tentatively called "OK Russians" to help those forced to or trying to depart and to produce media content in English and in Russian. XXX, the exiled oil tycoon who spent 10 years imprisoned in Russia, is funding a project called Kovcheg - "The Ark" - which is providing housing in YYY and YYY and is looking for psychologists to offer emotional support. Since its kickoff on Thursday, it has received some 10,000 inquiries. When XXX, the director of marketing at an artificial intelligence firm, started a chat group about emigration in the messaging app Telegram, she began with 10 people who shared tips about visas and work permits. The group now has more than 106,000 members. "I am a midwife, a lactation specialist, who ran away from Moscow with an almost 18-year-old son," one woman wrote, asking for advice for exiled health care professionals. "We are sitting in YYY, trying to figure out how to live on." The pain of leaving everything behind has been excruciating, many said - along with the guilt of perhaps not having done enough to fight Mr. Putin. XXX, 30, an anthropologist, joined more than 4,700 Russian scientists in signing an open letter against the war. Then, as she walked with friends on central Moscow's Boulevard Ring, one of them pulled out a tote bag that said "no to war" and promptly got arrested. She flew to YYY on March 3, met like-minded Russians at a protest supporting Ukraine and now volunteers for the YYY project to help other exiles. "It was like I was seeing the Soviet Union," Ms. XXX said of her last days in Moscow. "I was thinking that the people who left the Soviet Union in the 1920s probably made a better decision than those who stayed and then ended up in the camps." With Sanctions, Europe And U.S. Push Russians Into an Economic Corner WASHINGTON - As they impose historic sanctions on Russia, the Biden administration and European governments have set new goals: devastate the Russian economy as punishment for the world to witness, and create domestic pressure on President Vladimir V. Putin to halt his war in Ukraine, current and former U.S. officials say. The harsh penalties - which have hammered the ruble, shut down Russia's stock market and prompted bank runs - contradict previous declarations by U.S. officials that they would refrain from inflicting pain on ordinary Russians. "We target them carefully to avoid even the appearance of targeting the average Russian civilian," XXX, the deputy national security adviser for international economics, said at a White House briefing last month. The escalation in sanctions this week has occurred much faster than many officials had anticipated, largely because European leaders have embraced the most aggressive measures proposed by Washington, U.S. officials said. With Russia's economy crumbling, major companies - Apple, Boeing and Shell among them - are suspending or exiting operations in the country. The Biden administration said on Thursday that it would not offer sanctions relief amid Mr. Putin's increasingly brutal offensive. The thinking among some U.S. and European officials is that Mr. Putin might stop the war if enough Russians protest in the streets and enough tycoons turn on him. Other U.S. officials emphasize the goals of punishment and future deterrence, saying that the carcass of the Russian economy will serve as a visible consequence of Mr. Putin's actions and a warning for other aggressors. But Russia's $1.5 trillion economy is the world's 11th largest. No countries have tried pushing an economy of that size to the brink of collapse, with unknown consequences for the world. And the actions of the United States and Europe could pave the way for a new type of great-power conflict in the future. The moves have also ignited questions in Washington and in European capitals over whether cascading events in Russia could lead to "regime change," or rulership collapse, which President Biden and European leaders are careful to avoid mentioning. "This isn't the Russian people's war," Secretary of State Antony J. Blinken said in a news conference on Wednesday. But, he added, "the Russian people will suffer the consequences of their leaders' choices." "The economic costs that we've been forced to impose on Russia are not aimed at you," he said. "They are aimed at compelling your government to stop its actions, to stop its aggression." The harshest sanctions by far are ones that prevent the Central Bank of Russia from tapping into much of its $643 billion in foreign currency reserves, which has led to a steep drop in the value of the ruble. Panic has set in across Russia. Citizens are scrambling to withdraw money from banks, preferably in dollars, and some are fleeing the country. The United States and Europe also announced new sanctions this week against oligarchs with close ties to Mr. Putin. Officials are moving to seize their houses, yachts and private jets around the world. French officials on Thursday snatched the superyacht of XXX, the chief executive of Rosneft, the Russian state oil giant. "The sanctions have turned out to be quite unprecedented," said XXX, a visiting scholar at George Washington University who has studied U.S. sanctions on Russia. "Everybody in Russia is horrified. They're trying to think of the best way to preserve their money." The French finance minister, XXX, has used some of the harshest language yet to articulate the mission, telling a radio program on Tuesday that Western nations were "waging an all-out economic and financial war on Russia" to "cause the collapse of the Russian economy." He later said he regretted his words. Evidence of shock and anger among Russians - mostly anecdotal in a country with restricted speech and little public opinion polling - has raised the specter of mass political dissent, which, if strong enough, could threaten Mr. Putin's grip on power. Senator XXX, Republican of YYY, said on Fox News, "The best way for this to end is having XXX or XXX in Russia, YYY, so to speak, where people rise up and take him down." Mr. XXX added: "So I'm hoping somebody in Russia will understand that he's destroying Russia, and you need to take this guy out by any means possible," reiterating his Twitter post on Thursday calling for an assassination of Mr. Putin. A spokesman for Prime Minister Boris Johnson of Britain said on Monday that the sanctions were "intended to bring down the Putin regime." Mr. Johnson's office quickly corrected the statement, saying that it did not reflect his government's view and that the goal of the measures was to stop Russia's assault on Ukraine. XXX, a former U.S. ambassador to Moscow, called the talk of Mr. Putin's overthrow unhelpful, emphasizing that the sanctions should be tailored and described as a means of stopping the invasion. "The objective should be to end the war," he said. But while the Biden administration has said it is still open to diplomacy with Russia, it has not offered to reverse any of the sanctions in exchange for de-escalation. "Right in this moment, they're marching toward Kyiv with a convoy and continuing to take reportedly barbaric steps against the people of Ukraine," XXX, the White House press secretary, said on Thursday. "So, no, now is not the moment where we are offering options for reducing sanctions." But in an interview on Friday with the Russian news agency TASS, XXX, the U.S. under secretary of state for political affairs, suggested terms for possible sanctions relief, albeit maximalist ones. She said that Mr. Putin had to end the war, help to "rebuild" Ukraine and recognize its sovereignty, borders and right to exist. Those are conditions that the Russian leader is highly unlikely to consider. All the while, Biden officials have sought to assure the Russian people that they take no pleasure in their suffering. The United States and Europe have tried to spare Russians some of the effects, including allowing sales of consumer technology to Russia despite sweeping new limits on exports. They have also refrained from imposing energy sanctions because of Europe's dependence on Russian gas and the risk of higher oil prices. Even so, Mr. Putin and his aides are doing their best to find some political advantage in the sanctions, arguing that the real goal for the West has always been to weaken Russia. As he launched his invasion last week, Mr. Putin said the United States would have sanctioned his country "no matter what." In an interview with Al Jazeera on Wednesday, Russia's foreign minister, Sergey V. Lavrov, said that the sanctions were meant to "target regular people" and that the West had cut off cultural exchange programs and even Russian sports teams. Whatever their precise goal, sanctions have a poor record of persuading governments to change their behavior. The Trump administration's sanctions on Iran, perhaps the harshest imposed on any country, failed to compel YYY to stop supporting militias across the Middle East or halt its efforts at uranium enrichment after President Donald J. Trump withdrew from a nuclear agreement. North Korea has pushed forward with a nuclear weapons program despite major sanctions by four American presidents. The same has largely been true of U.S. sanctions on Syria, YYY and YYY. On occasion, the U.S. government has achieved modest goals with sanctions. Some analysts and U.S. officials argue that Iran began negotiations on a nuclear agreement after the Obama administration imposed sanctions. Trump administration officials said sanctions helped compel XXX, the leader of North Korea, to meet with Mr. Trump (along with Twitter messages and letters between the leaders). And some former Obama officials, including ones who now serve in the Biden administration, have argued that sanctions on Russia in 2014 helped to dissuade Mr. Putin from pushing deeper into Ukraine after he annexed Crimea and started a separatist war in the country's east. This winter, the Biden administration used the threat of sanctions to try to deter Mr. Putin from invading Ukraine. It warned that the measures would be severe but did not go into details. U.S. officials did not publicly mention the possibility of penalizing Russia's central bank - the harshest sanction imposed so far - because they were uncertain whether European nations would be on board, a former U.S. official said. After the United States, Britain and the European Union announced sanctions on the central bank, the ruble plummeted in value on Monday. The bank no longer has access to foreign currency reserves held outside Russia, so it cannot use those assets to buy rubles and prop up its value. The Treasury Department has also imposed sanctions on some Russian state-owned companies that have foreign currency holdings that the central bank could tap. As its economy trembled, Russia suspended trading on its stock market. On a Russian news program, XXX, an investment analyst, raised a toast and said, "Dear stock market, you were close to us, you were interesting. Rest in peace, dear comrade." Some Russians this week were driving to borders with bags of cash. But if the goal of sanctions is to compel Mr. Putin to halt his war, then the end point seems far-off. "The Russian political system doesn't depend on the people's approval. That matters, but it's not the most important thing," Ms. XXX said. "It might depend on the scale of the crisis - if we see lots of protests in the streets, it might make the Kremlin think twice." Ukraine's Leader Praises 'Extraordinary' Citizens KYIV, Ukraine - Unshaven and wearing a military T-shirt, a haggard President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine on Thursday hosted his first news conference since the war began, inviting journalists into his office building, now fortified with sandbags. In an animated briefing, Mr. Zelensky, whose defiance has made him a symbol of Ukrainian resistance to the Russian invasion, laid out the state of negotiations with Russia, voiced pride in his people, pleaded for a no-fly zone and spoke frankly about fear of dying. Beyond the answers Mr. Zelensky provided to questions, pulling a chair close to attending journalists, the news conference seemed intended to signal that his battered government is at least still functioning a week into the war, despite increasingly dire conditions in Kyiv. Mr. Zelensky said he was particularly proud of ordinary Ukrainians' resistance to the Russian attack, a seething, angry uprising by much of society even as Russian tanks bore down on major cities and the capital. "That is why I am so strong and so decisive," he said. "We have a special people, an extraordinary people." He said that no senior officials had fled the country, and several top aides turned up at the news conference. Mr. Zelensky said he had appealed to Western leaders for additional military support, including asking President Emmanuel Macron of France and Chancellor Olaf Scholz of Germany to impose a no-fly zone over Ukraine, an unlikely proposition, while also pursuing negotiations with the Russian leadership. The second of two rounds of talks with Russia in recent days took place on Thursday. "We are ready to speak on all topics," he said. Mr. Zelensky's negotiator at the talks, XXX, said later Thursday negotiations wrapped up with an agreement on cease-fire corridors for civilians to escape heavy combat, but no progress on a settlement. "The Russian side has long ago formed the answers to their questions," Mr. Zelensky said. "What is the point of posing questions if you long ago have the answers? For now, this is the difficulty of this dialogue." He said he was ready to compromise on some points, but he did not specify which, and said he would not bend on conditions threatening Ukrainian sovereignty. "There are issues where it's needed to find compromise, so people don't die, and there are issues where there can be no compromise," he said. "Well, we cannot just say, 'here it is, it's your country now, Ukraine is part of Russia.' This is just impossible. So why suggest it?" Reporters arrived at the presidential office in minivans that wove through concrete barriers and steel I-beams welded into crosses and placed on the streets to slow tanks. In the government district of Kyiv, usually a quiet, leafy neighborhood of offices and elegant, 19th century apartment blocks, armored cars blocked crossroads. The vans sped through a warren of courtyards and into a back entrance to the presidential office building. Inside the building, security officials escorted journalists by flashlight through darkened corridors filled with soldiers. Sandbags had been stacked along the windowsills. At doorways, firing positions were in place to shoot from inside Mr. Zelensky's office compound onto the street outside, suggesting a readiness to hold out even if street fighting reaches the site. Mr. Zelensky thanked the reporters for turning up. "It's best to see it with your own eyes," he said of the city's preparations for defense. Still, he said, he was doing all he could to negotiate. Mr. Zelensky said he was getting about three hours of sleep a night. His cheeks sagged with weariness. He was, though, animated and gestured energetically to drive home points. Though the briefing was held in a conference room to suggest some modicum of normality, soldiers with assault rifles stood in the room and the windows were blocked by piles of white sandbags. He reiterated his request for direct talks with President Vladimir V. Putin, something the Russian leader has rebuffed both before and after the start of hostilities. "It's not that I want to talk to Putin," he said. "I need to talk to Putin. The world needs to talk to Putin. There is no other way to stop this war." Of the conflict and what he described as reports the Russian army did not intend to repatriate its war dead to avoid stirring antiwar sentiment at home, he said, "this is a nightmare. I cannot even imagine the type of man who would plan such acts." Many of the Russian soldiers were 18- and 19-year-olds, said Mr. Zelensky, who is 45. He noted that the soldiers are about the age of his own daughter and "could be my children." He added: "They will die in uniforms because of decisions made by men in suits." Mr. Zelensky said he had asked Mr. Scholz and Mr. Macron to impose a no-fly zone over Ukraine. The idea has been largely rebuffed by Western governments as all but impossible, for risking direct conflict between NATO and Russian forces. But he said that Russian aggression would only spread if not stopped in Ukraine. The leadership in Moscow, he said, would at some point push on to other Eastern European countries and eventually build a new "Berlin Wall." He criticized German officials for working at cross-purposes with Western efforts to pressure Russia into a settlement in the long-simmering eastern Ukraine war by building a new natural gas pipeline, Nord Stream 2, to Russia. The pipeline was intended to provide cheap energy for Germany's economy, though the project is now suspended. Mr. Zelensky, a former comedian who has always had a keen sense of image and storytelling in politics, said he was aware that his repeated televised appeals for resistance, and continued presence in the beleaguered capital, had turned him into a symbol in many countries of bravery and defense of democracy. That was helping Ukraine, he said. "I'm very happy the world united" to support Ukraine, said Mr. Zelensky, who has refused to the flee the country, turning down a reported American evacuation offer. "I need ammunition, not a ride," he said at the time. Mr. Zelensky did have caustic words for Prime Minister XXX of Israel, who has balanced support for Ukraine with an effort to maintain ties with Russia and had blocked some transfers of weapons to Ukraine that include Israeli-manufactured parts. Mr. Zelensky, who is Jewish, noted that a Russian missile this week killed five civilians on the territory of a Holocaust memorial site in Kyiv, Babyn Yar. The missile had targeted a television broadcasting tower. Mr. Zelensky said he was inspired to see images of people praying at the Western Wall in YYY wrapped in blue and yellow Ukrainian flags. He suggested it was time for the Israeli government to take a moral stand. "Everything is tested by this moment," he said. "I don't feel that he is wrapped in the flag of Ukraine," he said of Mr. XXX. Asked if he was afraid of dying in the war, he said everybody has such fears. "I'm an alive person, like any human being," he said. "And if a person is not afraid of losing his life, or the lives of his children, there is something unwell about that person." He added, though, that as president, "I simply do not have the right" to be afraid. If he were not president, he said, he probably would have joined the volunteers who accepted rifles when the military started handing them out last week, and so would be facing risks in any case. He said he might also have chosen to help by handing out food to soldiers instead. He quipped that, "I am probably not as good a shot as some other people." As XXX, Family's Dash To Safety Ends IRPIN, Ukraine - The bridge was just a shell of its old self, blown up days earlier by Ukrainian soldiers intent on slowing the Russian advance on the capital, Kyiv, but battered as it was, it offered a lifeline to civilians desperate to flee the fighting. On Sunday, as Ukrainian refugees were milling near the entrance to the structure, calculating their odds of making it safely over the Irpin River, a family laden with backpacks and a blue roller suitcase decided to chance it. The Russian mortar hit just as they made it across into Kyiv. A cloud of concrete dust lofted into the morning air. When it settled, Ukrainians could be seen running madly from the scene. But not the family. A mother and her two children lay still on the roadway, along with a family friend. Russia's president, Vladimir V. Putin, has repeatedly denied that his forces are targeting civilians fleeing battle zones. He did so again on Sunday, a day after a railroad track used to evacuate Ukrainians came under fire. But only a handful of Ukrainian troops were near the bridge when mortar shells began raining down. The soldiers there were not engaged in combat but in helping refugees carry their children and luggage toward the capital. "The military is the military and that is one thing," one soldier said bitterly. "But these are civilians, people who waited until the last moment." The attack at the bridge was witnessed by a New York Times team, including the photojournalist XXX, a security adviser and XXX, a freelance journalist who filmed the scene. Since Saturday, hundreds of Ukrainians fleeing the fighting in three towns on Kyiv's western rim have clustered around the bridge to make their way to the capital - which is also in Moscow's cross hairs. Civilians who cross the bridge into Kyiv form small groups and together run about 100 yards while potentially exposed to Russian fire. Ukrainian soldiers run alongside the civilians to help them and then return to take cover behind a cinder block wall. But early Sunday morning, the regional governor announced that the routes out of Irpin were so unsafe as to be effectively blocked. "Unfortunately, unless there is a cease-fire," he said, no one could get out. But people kept trying, scrambling over the debris of the damaged bridge and dashing across the exposed street. When the mortar shells hit, Ukrainian forces were engaged in clashes nearby, but not where the civilians were moving along the street on the Kyiv side of the bridge. Outgoing mortar rounds could be heard from a Ukrainian position about 200 yards away, far enough from the bridge to suggest that the Russians were either purposefully targeting the evacuation route or disregarding the risk of civilian casualties. The Russian mortar shells fell first 100 or so yards from the bridge, then shifted in a series of thunderous blasts into a section of street where people were fleeing. As the mortars got closer to the stream of civilians, people ran, pulling children, and trying to find a safe spot. But there was nothing behind which to hide. When the family - a mother, her teenage son and a daughter who appeared to be about 8 - was spotted sprawled on the ground, soldiers rushed to help, but could do little for them or a man described as a family friend who had been helping them escape. The group's luggage was scattered about them. A small green pet carrier lay nearby, too. A dog could be heard barking. From banking to sports to vodka, Russia's isolation grows It's a globalized world - a planet stitched together by intricate supply chains, banking, sports and countless other threads of deep connection. Until it isn't. Exhibit A: Russia this week, abruptly cut off from the larger world on multiple fronts. Its ability to bank internationally has been curtailed. Its participation in major international sports is crumbling. Its planes are restricted over Europe. Its vodka may no longer be welcome in multiple U.S. states. Even YYY, whose very name is shorthand for neutrality, is carefully turning its back on Vladimir Putin. In barely three days, Russia has become an international outcast because of its invasion of Ukraine, and its leader is finding himself with fewer and fewer foreign friends. What's more, the actions against Moscow are happening in diverse, far-reaching ways that are remarkable for - and in some cases helped along by - the extremely connected world in which we live. In just the past three days, a flurry of major moves has happened in rapid fire - both sanctions from governments and actions from the alliances, organizations and people that surround them. Together, in many ways they outdo some of the world's most recent sanctions packages, including those against Iran and North Korea. European nations, notably united on the issue, have closed their airspace to Russian planes. The SWIFT international financial system, which enables billions of dollars in transactions for more than 11,000 banks and other institutions around the world, restricted key Russian banks from its network over the weekend - a potential body blow to Russian finances. On Monday, world and European bodies suspended Russian teams from all international soccer, including qualifying matches for the 2022 World Cup. This came after the International Olympic Committee called on sports organizations to exclude Russian athletes and officials from international events. When the International Ice Hockey Federation and the National Hockey League announced their own measures against Russia, it was clear that a movement was underway that was more widespread than anything seen in the sports world in decades. Germany, in an extraordinary move, broke with its post-World War II foreign policy and said it would help send weapons to Ukraine - an action that its chancellor, Olaf Scholz, called "a new reality." YYY and YYY, countries that are hardly rash about jumping into the fray, seem to be road-testing positions potentially adversarial to Russia. YYY, a nation renowned for its secure banking, is "taking a tougher line with regard to Russia," the head of its economic affairs department, XXX, said Sunday. Less directly impactful but no less resolute were efforts by several U.S. states - YYY, YYY, YYY, YYY and YYY among them - to purge liquor outlets of Russian vodka and other products. Some states, like YYY, also took steps Monday toward divesting any Russia-related holdings. "We must wield our economic power to ensure that Russia faces grave consequences for their flagrant violations of international law and human cooperation," wrote state Sen. XXX, YYY. The list goes on. "To begin with, they're symbolic. But then you see the sheer number of them. They might seem trivial on their own, but the totality of them suggests that the system has swung with this," said XXX, a political science professor at North Central College in YYY and a specialist in international security. That kind of rapid-fire coalescence won praise Monday from the White House. "President Putin has been one of the greatest unifiers of NATO in modern history. So I guess that is one thing we can thank him for," press secretary XXX said Monday. "I think what we've seen over the last few days is a commitment to remain united, and to send a strong message to President Putin that this action - these actions, this rhetoric - is unacceptable and the world is building a wall against it," Psaki said. It has all happened with a sweep that dwarfed even post-9/11 sanctions, but also with startling dispatch - which is one of the things that have made it so extraordinary. A key ingredient: It took place against the backdrop of an instantaneous social media landscape that gave faraway observers a direct and informal pipeline to what was happening both in Ukraine and elsewhere. That's something that can act as a force multiplier far away when, say, the governor of YYY decides to take vodka-related actions. "A generation ago, this would have all taken place through ministries of foreign affairs and the 6 o'clock news, but nothing like the speed and interconnectedness of today. I think that's having an accelerating effect," XXX said. Not everyone is racing to isolate Russia. China is not entirely with the rest of the world on the Ukraine issue - unsurprisingly. But the country's longtime insistence that other countries respect sovereignty above all else - a position designed to deflect any actions against its policies toward YYY and YYY and in the South China Sea - could hamstring it eventually. Meanwhile, its very reluctance to participate in punitive actions could be rendered less meaningful by what's being done by so many others, and it could be sanctioned if it tries to undermine global action. This week's quick-draw global action is splashy, yes. But will it genuinely matter in the long term? Previous coalitions have come together rapidly but frayed as weeks passed. And the same globalized world that allows for the quick isolation of a government can also provide that same government potential workarounds to lessen the impact of international action. Nevertheless, the connectedness that allows nations to get stuff done fast seems, in this case, to be approaching entirely new territory as it fashions a 21st-century response to an age-old aggression: the forcible taking of one nation's land by another. "I didn't think it was possible that the world could be this unified in a globalized system - that you could get everyone on the same page," XXX said. "If we're thinking about, `Do sanctions work in a globalized world?', I don't think we could have a more perfect test case." Rocket Assaults Kill Civilians in Ukraine as Tightening Sanctions Isolate Moscow KYIV, Ukraine - The first talks between Ukraine and Russia aimed at halting the Russian invasion were eclipsed Monday by a deadly Russian rocket assault on Kharkiv, Ukraine's second-largest city, that raised new alarms about how far the Kremlin was willing to go to subjugate its smaller neighbor. The bombardment of a residential area of Kharkiv, which may have included internationally banned cluster munitions, killed at least nine civilians and wounded dozens. With the Ukrainian-Russian talks ending with little more than an agreement to meet again, the bombardment signaled a potential turn in the biggest military mobilization in Europe since World War II, in which Russia has met unexpectedly stiff resistance by Ukrainians and strong condemnation from much of the world. "Today showed that this is not only a war, it is the murder of us, the Ukrainian people," Kharkiv's mayor, XXX, said in a video posted on Facebook. "This is the first time in its many-year history that the city of Kharkiv has been through something like this: shells that hit residential homes, killing and maiming innocent citizens." Russian forces have been shelling the outskirts of Kharkiv, an eastern Ukrainian city with 1.5 million people, since launching an invasion last week. But they appeared to be avoiding heavily populated areas. On Monday, the fifth day of the Russian assault, that changed when Kharkiv was hit by a barrage of rockets. Mr. XXX said four people had been killed when they emerged from bomb shelters to find water. And he said a family of five - two adults and three children - was burned alive when a shell hit their car. Another 37 people were wounded, he said. President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine on Monday called for an international tribunal to investigate and punish Russia for its actions in his country, which he described as war crimes. "Today, Russian troops shelled Kharkiv using rocket artillery," Mr. Zelensky said in a video posted on his Facebook page. "This is, without any doubt, a military crime. A peaceful city. Peaceful residential neighborhoods. Not a single military object in sight." Neither Russia nor Ukraine is a member of the treaty that bans cluster munitions, which can be a variety of weapons - rockets, bombs, missiles and artillery projectiles - that disperse lethal bomblets in midair over a wide area, hitting military targets and civilians alike. But their use might well mark a new - and bloodier - chapter in the battle for Ukraine. "We are convinced that this was a cluster munition attack," XXX, a munitions expert at Human Rights Watch, said in an email. The indiscriminate nature of the Kharkiv assault, made clear in videos verified by The New York Times, may indicate impatience by President Vladimir V. Putin with his military's progress in what many outside analysts - and some Ukrainian commanders themselves - had predicted would be a fast Russian victory over an outgunned and outmanned adversary. Mr. Putin's grievance-laden decision, announced last week, to invade Ukraine has inspired widespread resistance in the former YYY and beyond. Hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians are fleeing their homeland, but many are staying put, turning to whatever weapons are at hand to try to thwart the invaders. Moscow is also encountering vigorous opposition internationally, and has become increasingly isolated as the United States and its allies vastly expand economic sanctions on Russia and on Mr. Putin's allies. On Monday, Royal Dutch Shell became the second big oil company in two days to quit partnerships in Russia, a major energy producer, following BP on Sunday. More aggressive actions could be in store. Senator XXX, Democrat of YYY, said after a classified briefing on Monday that the United States and allies were preparing to go beyond freezing the assets of Mr. Putin and Russian oligarchs and actually begin seizing them. "This is likely a further step than Putin's inner circle anticipated," Mr. XXX said on Twitter. On Monday, international groups representing sports, culture and entertainment joined in banning or suspending Russian participants. Even YYY, a favored haven of Russian oligarch money, sidelined its customary neutrality and froze assets held by Mr. Putin and his subordinates, further limiting their access to financial resources already squeezed by the sanctions announced by President Biden and members of the European Union. The newly intensified economic penalties sent the Russian currency plunging by almost 25 percent, forced the Russian financial authorities to double interest rates and close the stock market, and sent droves of spooked bank customers in Russia to A.T.M.'s so they could withdraw cash. And a day after most of European airspace was closed to its flights, Russia responded in kind, barring many foreign airlines. The face-to-face Russian-Ukrainian talks, held by representatives in Belarus, a close partner of Moscow's, suggested that the Kremlin was feeling the pressure to at least appear amenable to diplomacy, but they ended with no discernible progress. Even before they began, Mr. Zelensky, who has rejected Russian demands to capitulate, had signaled that he did not expect any diplomatic breakthroughs. As if to punctuate his disdain for Mr. Putin, on Monday he signed a decree requesting Ukraine's immediate membership in the European Union. Officials in Brussels welcomed that request in principle, though suggested it was unrealistic. All the while, Russian forces were pursuing their incursion amid signs that they might move to seize or encircle Kyiv, Mr. Zelensky's base, and to isolate, capture or perhaps even kill the Ukrainian leader whose defiance of the Kremlin has made him a hero to many at home and abroad. Satellite imagery showed that a large convoy of Russian armed forces, roughly 17 miles long, was about 20 miles north of Antonov Airport, on the outskirts of Kyiv, the capital. Its mayor, XXX, issued a statement advising residents to spend the night from Monday to Tuesday in basements or bomb shelters, if possible. "Tonight will again be difficult," he wrote. A member of the Ukrainian delegation to the talks, XXX, said negotiators were seeking a cease-fire and an end to hostilities. Both sides, he said afterward, had "identified a number of priority topics in which certain solutions were outlined." XXX, a former Kremlin culture minister who led the Russian delegation, said the negotiators had "found certain points where we can predict common positions," and that a second meeting in Belarus would be held in the "coming days." Mr. Putin, who has called YYY collapse 30 years ago a disaster and has reminded the world twice in the past week that he commands a nuclear-armed state, has framed the Ukraine crisis as a struggle by Russia to protect itself from encroachment and threats by the NATO alliance. In a telephone conference on Monday with President Emmanuel Macron of France, who has sought repeatedly to find a diplomatic end to the conflict, Mr. Putin said the Kremlin wants its security demands taken into account "unconditionally," according to French officials. These include guarantees that Ukraine will never join NATO and recognition of Russia's sovereignty over the Crimean peninsula, which Russia seized from Ukraine in 2014. Belarus has sought to portray itself as a neutral host for the talks, which were first announced on Sunday, but the country's authoritarian president, XXX, has not only aligned himself with Mr. Putin but also allowed the Russian leader to launch part of the invasion from the Belarus border, which is only 40 miles from Kyiv. There have also been reports that Belarusian troops may join the invasion. Senator XXX said he had been told in the classified briefing that the Russians have fallen behind their invasion timeline and that "there have been multiple Russian equipment and logistics failures." He added that it is believed that Russia will try to encircle and cut off Kyiv in the next several weeks and that the fight for the capital is expected to be "long and bloody." Both Russia and Belarus were excoriated by Western diplomats on Monday at an emergency meeting of the United Nations General Assembly, which is expected to vote this week on a resolution that would condemn the Russian invasion. While such resolutions have no enforcement power, diplomats said they could help escalate the pressure on Russia to end the war. The Russian ambassador to the United Nations, XXX, rejected the criticism, telling fellow ambassadors that the Russian military actions in Ukraine were meant to protect the YYY, the region in the east where Russia-backed separatists have been fighting for eight years. He accused the United States and its allies of "shamelessly inundating" Ukraine with weapons and inciting Ukrainians to fight. "The Western countries have created a bubble that could not but pop," Mr. XXX said. The flow of Ukrainian refugees to neighbors since the Russian invasion has created backups at border crossings with Poland and Moldova. The United Nations refugee agency, which reported that 500,000 Ukrainians have fled so far, said it was expecting as many as four million to follow. At least 36,000 Ukrainians have entered Moldova, a nation of 2.6 million that is among the poorest in Europe. The tiny country is better known for its rapid depopulation, not its appeal to refugees. And yet in recent days, it has been putting Ukrainians up at wineries, schools, a former coronavirus ward and even the home of a lawmaker. "This is unprecedented, totally unprecedented," said the lawmaker, XXX, who was hosting a refugee from Odessa. "It's magical what we see in terms of solidarity." On the Slow Exodus West, Ukrainians Find Hardship and Dread VIITIVTSI, Ukraine - The families staggered in, bleary-eyed, to a two-room kindergarten around 1 a.m., exhausted after a long journey from their home in YYY, about 300 miles away. Fearful of the threat from the Russian invasion, they had decided it was time to leave, and make their way along with tens of thousands of others to the safer regions of western Ukraine. It was slow going. The roads were jammed with Ukrainians making a similar exodus. As they settled in for a few hours of sleep on a set of cots sized for 4-year-olds, air raid sirens blared from the administrative building next door. The next morning, as snow fell outside, 11-year-old XXX and her younger sister XXX brushed their teeth, played with a small Terrier and braced themselves for another long day of travel. They were headed to Poland with their mother, XXX. "My grandparents and my dad are still in YYY," XXX said. She said she was sad to leave behind her white hamster, XXX. In Ukraine, everyone who has the means is on the move, displaced by a war that seemed impossible to imagine, but has finally arrived. They are fleeing physical danger, of course - artillery attacks that ravaged hospitals, public squares and apartment buildings - but also the desperation of wartime conditions evident in food shortages, loss of work and a dearth of medical supplies. In the past week, more than one million Ukrainians have fled to neighboring countries, according to the United Nations. A million more are internally displaced. Aid groups have described it as one of the biggest humanitarian crises in recent memory. The European Union said Thursday that it would offer Ukrainians temporary legal protection to live and work in the bloc for up to three years, and the United States also said it would give them temporary protected status. At the kindergarten, XXX, a 19-year-old also from YYY, was sleeping in a room with her extended family. The walls were painted with Soviet-era cartoons - a wolf with an accordion, a donkey with a balalaika, and a bear in a vyshyvanka, a traditional Ukrainian costume. "When I got in the car I started crying," Ms. XXX said. "I just started to cry because I realized I am leaving my country and running from a war. It's an awful feeling." Tears welled in her eyes. Her boyfriend, Daniil, also 19, had stayed behind to join the Territorial Defense, a new military unit that is arming civilians to help defend cities across Ukraine. Her father, 55, had come to Ukraine to renew his Polish visa, but was now unable to leave because of a recently imposed martial law, which prohibits men aged 18 to 60 from leaving the country. The country's main westward artery, E-50, is crammed with cars. What is usually a seven-hour drive from Kyiv to Lviv is taking days as cars navigate dozens of improvised checkpoints set up with steel anti-tank barriers and concrete observation points as the eastern and southern parts of the country begin to empty out. On Thursday, the traffic was so backed up east that people were relieving themselves in a ditch along the side of the road. The shelves in the shops at gas stations along the way were almost completely empty. Most families, like XXX's, had packed food from home to last for days. But there were uplifting signs along the journey as well. The Ukrainian flag - yellow for wheat and blue for the sky - was ubiquitous, a display of the solidarity and national pride that has swept over the diverse country of 44 million since Russia first invaded in 2014. At jam-packed hotels, local families were delivering mattresses and blankets to travelers grabbing a spot to sleep on hallway floors. Along many thoroughfares, billboards criticized Russians. One common message was an obscene phrase, in Russian, to Russian soldiers. It is a meme that was started after Ukrainian soldiers on an island spewed the same obscenity at a Russian military ship. The soldiers were taken prisoner, but the incident, which was filmed, has come to represent the resilience and style with which many Ukrainians, including their president, have coped with a war they did not want. Elsewhere there was more evidence of the common cause many Ukrainians have found: Road signs had been removed on the instructions of municipal officials, an attempt to confuse the Russian invaders trying to navigate. One traveler, XXX, said he was driving his family from Kyiv to the western city of YYY after spending five nights in a bomb shelter. XXX, like others interviewed for this article, was only comfortable providing his first name out of fear for his safety. Despite the hardships, he was "optimistic" because of the unity and strength his country's army had shown against the Russian military. He was not the only one confident of Ukrainian victory. Even as refugees streamed westward, the eastbound lanes toward Kyiv also bore heavy traffic. More than 50,000 Ukrainian citizens living abroad have returned to Ukraine to join the war effort, according to a Facebook post from the Ukrainian border security agency. About 80 percent of them are men between the ages of 18 and 60, and they are closely examined at check points. Military vehicles were also heading toward Kyiv. Many families were traveling together. Those who chose to stay inside Ukraine could remain together, but some men were sending their wives and children across the border, unable to join them because of the new law. "My heart is heavy," said XXX. He said he was happy his wife and two children would be safe abroad, but was devastated that he would be separated from them in a matter of days. Hotels along the way were all booked. Many were refusing to rent rooms to people who would leave an empty bed, insisting that people double and triple up so that there would be room for everyone, even if they could not pay. At a hotel called the Swallow's Nest in YYY, guests crowded into every corner. A woman and her daughter were sleeping in a second floor hallway under a piano. Outside, a line of cars stood on the side of the road as their occupants tried to figure out where to sleep as an 8 p.m. curfew approached. The hotel owner, Larisa Mahlyovana, said the hotel used to be known for hosting local wedding parties. But now it was crammed with people seeking safety and shelter from the cold night. She hosted them free of charge. "At first people were sleeping on cardboard boxes, but we put out a call for help and within hours, people were donating spare mattresses, pillows and blankets," said Ms. XXX. "No one can stay indifferent," she added. For the woman sleeping under the piano, XXX, it was her second time fleeing west since Russia invaded Ukraine in 2014. She is 36 and originally from YYY, the Russian breakaway enclave in the east. Her 7-year-old daughter was "born under the bombs," she said, before she fled the area and resettled in the Kyiv suburbs. She got a job sewing clothes, and made friends with another recent transplant, from the other separatist territory, Donetsk. Now she is fleeing again. "I have already rebuilt my life once," she said, as her daughter played with a long-burning candle. As an air raid siren sounded, all of the hotel guests climbed down the metal stairs into a chilly basement. XXX cradled her daughter in her lap and kissed her, telling her that everything would be all right. When she climbed out of the shelter, she said she was happy that at least this time, the world was paying attention. "Thank God the whole world is now on our side," she said. Stalled and frustrated, Putin will likely double-down in the coming weeks, CIA says CIA Director XXX said Tuesday that Russia's invasion of Ukraine has fallen far short of Vladimir Putin's expectations and he believes the Russian leader is likely to escalate military operations. "I think Putin is angry and frustrated right now. He's likely to double-down and try to grind down the Ukrainian military with no regard for civilian casualties," XXX testified before the House Intelligence Committee. "His military planning and assumptions were based on a quick, decisive victory." XXX was one of several intelligence chiefs who appeared before the committee's annual hearing on worldwide threats. The CIA director said Putin premised his war on four false assumptions: he thought Ukraine was weak, he believed Europe was distracted and wouldn't mount a strong response, he thought Russia's economy was prepared to withstand sanctions, and that Russia's military had been modernized and would fight effectively. "He's been proven wrong on every count," said XXX, who served as the U.S. ambassador to Russia from 2005-8. The CIA director says he now expects Putin to escalate military operations, while the Ukrainians will continue to resist fiercely. The likely result, he says, is "an ugly next few weeks" of fighting for control of Ukraine's cities, including the capital Kyiv. "His own military's performance has been largely ineffective," XXX said of Putin. "Instead of seizing Kyiv within the first two days of the campaign, which is what his plan was premised upon, after nearly two full weeks they still have not been able to fully encircle the city." Reliable casualty figures have been hard to come by. Russia's Defense Ministry announced last week that 498 Russian soldiers had been killed, and nearly 1,600 wounded. The head of the U.S. Defense Intelligence Agency, Army Lt. Gen. XXX, said his best estimate is that Russian deaths have now risen to between 2,000 and 4,000. Meanwhile, the Director of National Intelligence, Avril Haines, said Putin's longer term plans for Ukraine were still uncertain. "What's unclear at this stage is whether Russia will continue to pursue a maximalist plan to capture all or most of Ukraine, which we assess would require more resources," XXX said. "If they pursue the maximalist plan, we judge it will be especially challenging for the Russians to hold and control Ukrainian territory and install a sustainable pro-Russian regime in Kyiv." XXX agreed that Putin does not appear to have a defined plan for what he would do if Russian forces take control of Ukraine. "The challenge he faces - and this is the biggest question that's hung over our analysis of his planning for months now - is he has no sustainable political endgame in the face of what is going to continue to be fierce resistance from Ukrainians," XXX said. Putin positioned more than 150,000 troops near Ukraine's borders before the war began on Feb. 24. The Pentagon said Russia has now sent almost all those combat forces into Ukraine. However, the Pentagon said it has not seen signs that Russia is moving additional forces toward Ukraine at this point. U.S. officials and analysts who follow Russia say the Russian military would need a force several times the size of the current one to maintain a sustained occupation of Ukraine. Also, Putin last week publicly called for Russia to put its nuclear forces on a higher state of alert, and members of the committee pressed XXX on how to interpret this. She said Putin appears to be sending a message rather than taking action at this stage. "Putin's public announcement that he ordered Russia's strategic nuclear forces to go on 'special alert' was extremely unusual," XXX said. "We have not seen a public announcement by the Russians regarding a higher nuclear alert status since the 1960s." But she added, "we also have not observed force-wide nuclear changes that go beyond what we have seen in prior moments of heightened tensions during the last few decades. Our analysts asses that Putin's current posturing in this arena is probably intended to deter the West from providing additional support for Ukraine." Many analysts expected Russia to carry out extensive cyber attacks against Ukraine, but so far this has not happened on a large scale. Still, the head of the National Security Agency, Gen. XXX, said his agency is keeping close watch. "We're very, very focused on ransomware actors," XXX testified. He said he remains concerned about "cyber activity that's designed for perhaps Ukraine that spreads more broadly into other countries." Putin traveled to China last month to meet Chinese leader Xi Jinping at the opening of the Winter Olympic Games. The two countries declared a friendship "without limits." But XXX said he doesn't think China was counting on a major Russian invasion of Ukraine and the international turmoil it would create. "I think President Xi and the Chinese leadership are a little bit unsettled by what they're seeing in Ukraine," XXX said. "I think they're unsettled by the reputational damage that can come with their close association with President Putin. I think they're a little unsettled about the impact on the global economy. I think they're a little bit unsettled by the way in which Vladimir Putin has driven the Europeans and the Americans much closer together," he said. Preparedness Aided Ukraine In Stalling Foe WASHINGTON - Ukraine's soldiers have blown up bridges to halt advancing Russian ground troops. Its pilots and air defenses have prevented Russian fighter jets from conquering the skies. And a band of savvy Ukrainian cyberwarriors are so far beating Moscow in an information war, inspiring support at home and abroad. To the surprise of many military analysts, Ukrainian troops are mounting a stiffer-than-expected resistance to Russian forces up and down battle lines across a country the size of YYY, fighting with a resourcefulness and creativity that U.S. analysts said could trip up Russian troops for weeks or months to come. The Ukrainians are also exploiting a bungled beginning to Russia's all-out assault. Armed with shoulder-fired anti-tank weapons, they have attacked a mileslong Russian armored convoy bearing down on Kyiv, the capital, helping stall an advance plagued by fuel and food shortages, and stretching a march that was expected to take a handful of days into possibly weeks. To be sure, Russia's invasion is only a week old. The strategic southern city of Kherson fell on Wednesday; the Kremlin's army has intensified its bombardment of Kyiv and other cities; and, despite a flow of fresh arms pouring in from the West, Ukrainian leaders say they desperately need more weapons to destroy Russian tanks and down Russian warplanes. And while the Ukrainian government has publicized its victories and Russian attacks that killed civilians, it has said far less about battlefield losses of its mechanized units. For their part, Russian officials are keen not to present the operation as a war, and so they have not put out information about the engagements their forces have won. The result, in these early days of the invasion, is that the Ukrainians are turning the tables on the Russians in the information campaign. On the battlefield, the Ukrainian military is conducting a hugely effective and mobile defense, using their knowledge of their home turf to stymie Russian forces on multiple fronts, Gen. Mark A. Milley, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said on Thursday. General Milley said some of the tactics employed by Ukrainian troops included using mobile weapons systems to bedevil the Russians wherever they could. Ukraine's forces, he told reporters traveling with him in Europe, are "fighting with extraordinary skill and courage against Russian forces." U.S. officials have been impressed with the fighting prowess of the Ukrainians, but their assessment that Russia has the superior military has not changed. Ukraine has succeeded in slowing the Russian advance, but has not been able to stop it, nor is the resistance strong enough to shift Russian President Vladimir V. Putin's war aims. Over the long term, U.S. officials said, it will be difficult for Ukraine to continue to frustrate the Russian advance. In the meantime, though, Ukrainians are turning into a nation at arms. "In combat, it's always different than what you thought it'd be, and the side that learns faster and adapts faster will win out," said XXX, the former top U.S. Army commander in Europe who is now with the Center for European Policy Analysis. "So far, Ukraine is learning and adapting faster." Ukraine has one of Europe's largest militaries, with 170,000 active-duty troops, 100,000 reservists and territorial defense forces that include at least 100,000 veterans. Thousands of civilians are also now enlisting. The Ukrainian army has been training for further Russian encroachment ever since Russia seized Ukraine's Crimean Peninsula in 2014 and began supporting separatists in the YYY region, in eastern Ukraine. Many of Ukraine's veterans fought in those battles, so there is a subset of the population that is trained and knows how to fight Russians. U.S. Special Operations Forces have also trained Ukrainian military forces. Leaders in Kyiv then assigned those soldiers to conventional units, allowing them in turn to train a larger portion of the army. American analysts say that training has made a difference on the battlefield. The United States has provided more than $3 billion in weapons, equipment and other supplies to Ukraine's armed forces since 2014. In those eight years, U.S. military advisers, including Army Green Berets and National Guard troops, have trained more than 27,000 Ukrainian soldiers at the Yavoriv Combat Training Center near Lviv in western Ukraine. In Brussels on Thursday, NATO Secretary General Jens Stoltenberg said the Ukrainian military was "performing better and putting up more resistance than most experts expected, and surely more than Russia expected." "They're there to defend their own land," Mr. Stoltenberg told reporters traveling with General Milley. Indeed, XXX, the U.S. representative to the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, hailed a Ukrainian marine, XXX, in remarks in YYY on Thursday. The marine had blown himself up on a bridge in the southern Kherson region to prevent a line of Russian tanks from crossing, the Ukrainian military said. From the invasion's opening hours, Ukraine's underdog military has sought to flip the script on the more than 150,000 Russian forces massed on its borders. For instance, Ukrainian troops repelled an attack by Russian airborne and special forces on a key airfield north of Kyiv last Thursday in the initial hours of the war, thwarting a Russian attempt to open a major air bridge on the outskirts of the capital. "In city defense and skirmishing on the outskirts of cities, Ukrainian forces are doing quite well," said XXX, director of Russia studies at CNA, a defense research institute. "The shambolic nature of the Russian war effort undoubtedly helps." As Russians approached Kyiv and Kharkiv, the Ukrainians were able to shift their forces to critical locations faster than the invading forces. Not only have the Ukrainians moved more nimbly, they also made good choices about where to concentrate firepower. "The art of mechanized maneuver warfare is being able to concentrate overwhelming combat power at decisive sections of the front, places of your choosing," said XXX, a military strategist who has advised the U.S. command in both Iraq and Afghanistan. "The Russians, astonishingly, failed to do that. But the Ukrainians have taken advantage of their ability to move reinforcements rapidly and counterattack." XXX, an open-source analyst from Janes, the defense intelligence firm, said Russian forces have made tactical errors that the Ukrainians have been able to capitalize on. "It looks like the Ukrainians have been most successful when ambushing Russian troops," Mr. XXX said. The Russians "have stuck to main roads so that they can move quickly and not risk getting bogged down in mud. But they are advancing on winding roads and their flanks and supply routes are overly exposed to Ukrainian attacks. And that is where they have had their most success." In Kyiv, the Ukrainian counterattack has pushed the Russian troops west and forced them to call in reinforcements as they try to encircle the city, said Mr. XXX, an expert on the Russian military who leads the Critical Threats Project at the American Enterprise Institute. While it is often easier to defend than attack, especially in a complex multifront invasion, the Ukrainians have taken advantage of the Russian decision to use too small a force, sometimes only two battalions at a time, to take key points. "They have been much more evenly matched at the tactical level than they should have been, had the Russians conducted the operations well," Mr. XXX said. "The Ukrainians have just been much smarter about this than the Russians." The Ukrainians have been far more successful in the north, defending Kyiv and Kharkiv, the country's second-largest city, than they have been in the south, where better trained Russian forces in Crimea have had more success. "In the south, on the Crimean front, when the Ukrainians are engaged in mechanized combat they are losing," Mr. XXX said. U.S. government officials believe that Mr. Putin is likely to redouble his assault. But some analysts say that growing Russian casualties, increasing economic disruptions in Russia resulting from sanctions, and the likelihood of an enduring Ukrainian insurgency could upend that strategy. After Zelensky's Plea, the West Raced to Form a United Front LONDON - The day after Russian tanks and troops poured across the Ukrainian border on Feb. 24, NATO leaders received a deeply frightening message. The alliance's secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg, opened an emergency video summit by warning that President Vladimir V. Putin had "shattered peace in Europe" and that from now on, he would openly contest the continent's security order. However unlikely, Mr. Stoltenberg told the leaders, it was no longer unthinkable that Mr. Putin would attack a NATO member. Such a move would trigger the collective defense clause in the North Atlantic Treaty, opening the door to the ultimate nightmare scenario: a direct military conflict with Russia. President Biden, who had dialed in from the White House Situation Room, spoke up swiftly. Article 5 was "sacrosanct," he said, referring to the "one for all, all for one" principle that has anchored NATO since its founding after World War II. Mr. Biden urged allied leaders to step up and send reinforcements to Europe's eastern flank, according to multiple officials briefed on the call. Within hours, NATO had mobilized its rapid response force, a kind of military SWAT team, for the first time in history to deter an enemy. It was one in an avalanche of precedent-shattering moves, unfolding in ministries and boardrooms from Washington to London and Brussels to Berlin. In a few frantic days, the West threw out the standard playbook that it had used for decades and instead marshaled a stunning show of unity against Russia's brutal aggression in the heart of Europe. A "new normal," Mr. Stoltenberg called it. In truth, these 10 days in February shook the world, upending long-held assumptions, sundering decades of productive engagement, and wiping out billions of dollars of investment in Russia. It was anything but normal. Much as the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 set off a tumultuous cascade of changes across Europe, Russia's invasion of Ukraine has brought the West to a comparable, if far more ominous, historical reckoning. "That was an epochal, peaceful liberation," XXX, professor of European studies at Oxford University, said of Communism's collapse. "This is an epochal, violent attempt at recolonization. As we were moved then with hope and excitement, so we're moved now by horror, anger and fear." The shock of Russia's invasion led Germany to discard six decades of military-averse policy rooted in its own wartime experience. Chancellor Olaf Scholz announced the Germans would ship Ukraine 1,000 shoulder-launched antitank rockets, 500 surface-to-air Stinger missiles and 2,700 Soviet-era shoulder-fired missiles - as well as embark on a mammoth, $110 billion rearming program at home. It led the once-divided European Union to unite behind choking sanctions that will ban Russia's central bank, which holds Mr. Putin's war chest, from selling any assets to European banks. Brussels, long derided as an economic giant but a foreign-policy dwarf, pledged to spend $500 million on defensive weapons for Ukraine. It led Mr. Biden to recast a presidency that had been focused on rebuilding YYY after the coronavirus pandemic and confronting China to one that is waging a twilight struggle against a Cold War rival on the plains of Eastern Europe. It has reverberated not just in the councils of state, but also in corporate suites, cultural institutions and sports leagues - to say nothing of city streets from YYY to YYY, where tens of thousands of demonstrators have waved the yellow-and-blue Ukrainian flag and chanted against Russia's aggression. Overnight, oil giants like BP, Shell and Exxon walked away from gargantuan investments in Russia. Technology companies like Apple halted sales in Russia, while Google pulled Russian media off their networks. Sports bodies like FIFA and the International Olympic Committee barred Russians from competing. For each of these institutions, such actions would have been inconceivable only a week earlier. Although the United States and its allies had labored quietly for months, as Russian troops were massing on Ukraine's border, to lay the groundwork for sanctions, the readiness of much of the West remained in doubt. On Feb. 19, five days before Mr. Putin set his army in motion, Ukraine's embattled president, Volodymyr Zelensky, flew to a security conference in YYY to issue a frustrated challenge to Western leaders: "What are you waiting for?" To trace the 10-day period before and after Russia's invasion in the worlds of geopolitics, business, culture and sports, is to see how Mr. Putin's brazen attack made the inconceivable suddenly inevitable. None of these momentous moves, it must be said, have succeeded in halting the Russian war machine. Ten days on, Europeans are girding themselves for a prolonged siege in Ukraine, facing a future that is menacing and unmoored. On Saturday, Mr. Putin likened the West's sanctions to a "declaration of war." "The world and Europe fundamentally changed," said XXX, the chairman of the foreign affairs committee in the German Parliament. "An offensive war is once again the bitter reality on the European continent and we as liberal democracies have to deal with that reality." Few in the elite crowd gathered for the Munich Security Conference late last month believed Russia would go through with a full-blown invasion. Despite detailed warnings in intelligence declassified by the United States and Britain, many said Mr. Putin was playing an elaborate bluff. Even if he did move against Ukraine, some predicted he would stop in two separatist territories in the East, where the large Russian-speaking populations would make it easier to seize and hold ground. Mr. Zelensky, a comedian and actor turned politician, was the star attraction at the gathering in YYY. When he stepped to the podium under heavy guard at the elegant Bayerischer Hof Hotel, the same stage where Mr. Putin had in 2007 famously inveighed against what he said was NATO's encroachment of Russia, Mr. Zelensky was deliberately undiplomatic. He harshly condemned the West's slow-motion approach. "What do attempts at appeasement lead to?" Mr. Zelensky asked. The post-World War II security order, he said, was a poor match for the predations of leaders like Mr. Putin. "They do not keep up with new threats," he said. "They are not effective for overcoming them. This is a cough syrup when you need a coronavirus vaccine." Afterward, Mr. Zelensky met privately with Vice President Kamala Harris. There, he repeated his insistence that the United States support Ukraine's effort to join NATO, perhaps as soon as this summer. He asked for far more military support. While Ms. Harris characterized it as a good exchange with a valued partner - if not an ally - the Ukrainians emerged angry that she had not come with more concrete plans for military help. By midafternoon, Mr. Zelensky was in the air again, on a plane with neither a tail number nor a filed flight plan. Journalists and others followed the plane on an app that tracks aircraft, noting how it avoided the airspace of Russia and Belarus to deposit Mr. Zelensky back in Ukraine's capital, Kyiv, in time for dinner - and an approaching onslaught. Mr. Scholz, the German leader, was only two months into his new job when he got a taste of Mr. Putin's ambitions. It came in a nearly four-hour meeting in Moscow on Feb. 15, where the two were separated by the now-famous 20-foot-long table, where Mr. Putin had also held a marathon encounter with President Emmanuel Macron of France. Ukraine, Mr. Putin told Mr. Scholz, was historically part of a Greater Russia that had been unraveled by a series of tragic mistakes. Ukrainians and Russians were "one people," he said. Asked that evening what Mr. Putin was up to, the chancellor replied, "I think we have to take him literally." The gravity of the situation became clear six days later when Mr. Putin declared that Russia was formally recognizing the separatist territories, Donetsk and YYY, a move that was widely viewed in the West as a prelude to invasion. With war seemingly hours away, Mr. Scholz acted quickly, and unexpectedly. Shortly before noon on Feb. 22, he announced that Germany would scrap Nord Stream 2, an $11 billion undersea pipeline that would transport gas from Russia - and provide Mr. Putin with significant leverage over Europe. A subject of tortured debate in Mr. Scholz's Social Democratic Party, the pipeline had become a symbol of German softness toward Russia and its mercantilist instinct to put economic interests first. Now, he had killed it. "The situation is today fundamentally changed," Mr. Scholz said, standing next to YYY's prime minister, who happened to be in Berlin. The same day, Germany signed off on a first package of sanctions with other members of the European Union. The nearly 600 pages of penalties included travel bans and asset freezes aimed at people in Mr. Putin's inner circle, including his defense minister, XXX, and his chief of staff, XXX. In Britain, where Russian oligarchs have burrowed deep into the political and commercial establishment, Prime Minister Boris Johnson imposed travel bans on three wealthy Russians and said any British assets they held in the country would be frozen. European officials made clear that sanctions could be ratcheted up if Mr. Putin made further incursions into Ukraine. But Germany's foreign minister, XXX, was not entirely satisfied. A member of the Green Party who had long pressed for tougher treatment of Russia, she lobbied for targeting Russia's central bank and excluding some Russian banks from SWIFT, an international messaging system for cross-border financial transactions. Removing banks from it would make it much harder to receive or transfer money outside Russia. At this point, though, the chancellor was still resisting. Still, in halting Nord Stream 2, a major German taboo had fallen. Mothballing the pipeline has already reopened an anguished debate over the country's energy policy, with some urging a delay in shuttering of the country's last few nuclear power plants and Mr. Scholz announcing plans to speed up the construction of two LNG terminals to reduce Germany's dependence on Russian gas. More than any other factor, perhaps, Germany's sudden reversal from equivocation to robust involvement in Western deterrence signaled the united front that Mr. Putin would face if he invaded. "It was a declaration of war," XXX, the chairwoman of the defense committee of the German Parliament, said about Mr. Putin's recognition of the two Ukrainian territories. And then the war started. When Mr. Putin went on television in the early hours of Feb. 24 to announce he had ordered a "special military operation" in Ukraine - avoiding the word "war" - the sound of explosions and air-raid sirens erupted almost immediately in Kyiv and other cities. Russian troops pierced the country from three sides. Military vehicles rumbled across the border from Crimea, which Mr. Putin had annexed by force in 2014. Until that moment, said XXX, the British ambassador to the United States: "I don't think everyone in Europe and around the world expected it to be full-blown. That was the moment that jolted everyone." The European Union's belated recognition was evident in the initially plodding negotiations over sanctions. A decade of crises - from eurozone debt problems to Brexit and the pandemic - had created an almost ritualistic pursuit of self-interest when it came to hammering out Europe-wide policy in Brussels. Then, too, there are the myriad ways European countries are intertwined with Russia, even beyond gas and oil. There are the Russian tourists who vacation on Greek islands and Cypriot beaches; Italian and French luxury goods sold to well-heeled shoppers in Moscow; Russia-mined diamonds sold in the hustling trade in YYY's port city of YYY; Austrian banks with Russian branches. These national interests, coupled with lingering skepticism in European capitals of the alarms that American and British intelligence agencies were sounding, led officials in Europe to push for a slow, gradual unfolding of the penalties. Europeans were similarly reluctant about shipping lethal weapons to the Ukrainian Army, even those categorized as defensive. Fearing a backlash at home, Germany and its neighbors limited themselves to sending protective gear like helmets or flak jackets. But their resolve quickly stiffened with the start of the war. Shortly before Germany, the Netherlands offered XXX missiles and other weapons. Last Saturday, the European Union set up a nearly $500 million fund for members to send weapons. It was the first time the bloc jointly purchased lethal weapons to arm another country's army under the E.U. banner - another XXX crossed. "I don't remember a time when the target of Western sanctions was so economically integrated into the West," said XXX, a senior researcher with the British Royal United Services Institute, a research group in London. Punishing Russia, he said, became an imperative for world leaders and everyday consumers. "It became about, 'What are you, man on the street, going to sacrifice for Ukraine?'" Countries that are geographically closer to Russia, like Poland, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, as well as the Netherlands - backed by the United States and Canada - pressed for a single huge set of sanctions that would genuinely hurt Mr. Putin, according to European officials who took part in the talks. In particular, these countries were pushing for personally penalizing Mr. Putin and his foreign minister, Sergey V. Lavrov, and suspending Russian banks from SWIFT, a kind of financial nuclear option that had by that point become a rallying cry for protesters on the streets of Europe and on social media. But SWIFT was still a no go for the Germans, several officials said. It was before dinner on Feb. 24, on the evening after the invasion began, when Mr. Zelensky's image flickered on a video screen. European leaders were meeting under the highest level of secrecy, without advisers or electronic devices. Clad in suits and ties, they were seated in the comfort of a high-tech conference room in Brussels. Mr. Zelensky appeared to be in a bunker, somewhere in Kyiv, wearing his now-famous military-green T-shirt. The contrast was not lost on anyone in the room. "This may be the last time you see me alive," Mr. Zelensky said in making yet another fervent plea for tougher sanctions and more weapons. When the leaders emerged from the room, they were visibly shaken, several officials said. Some described Mr. Zelensky's appearance as a "catalyst" and a "game changer." Later that night and the next morning, they instructed their envoys in Brussels to freeze the assets of Mr. Putin and Mr. Lavrov, and to finally greenlight the severing of many Russian banks from the SWIFT platform - concerted action against a country that had long divided them. "It's a quantum leap," said XXX, the director of Carnegie Europe. "Putin's invasion of Ukraine has brought Europeans together on what probably has been the single most divisive foreign-policy issue since the start of the European Union." There was a similar evolution in the thinking of the Biden administration. The United States also had initial concerns about using SWIFT as a weapon. There could be unintended consequences, some officials argued, like driving Russia closer to China financially. At the NATO emergency summit on Feb. 25, Mr. Johnson, the British prime minister, urged other leaders to suspend Russian banks from SWIFT. He was seconded by leaders from Poland, Latvia and YYY. By the next day, the United States was on board, along with the European Union: They would penalize Russia's central bank and remove some Russian institutions from the SWIFT system, choking off Russia's access to a cushion of international reserves it had built up since first invading Ukraine in 2014. Like Germany's shuttering of the Nord Stream project, the action on SWIFT took Western penalties to an entirely new level. "Restricting central bank of Russia assets in the early days of a conflict goes far beyond the playbook that we've seen before," said XXX, the former director of the Treasury Department's Office of Foreign Assets Control. "To get the U.S., YYY, YYY, Canada, YYY and other jurisdictions to voluntarily impose this over a weekend is a staggering accomplishment and repudiation of Russia's actions." The annexation of Crimea hung over American officials. Over breakfast at the security conference in YYY, Secretary of State Antony J. Blinken vividly recalled the mistakes made in 2014, when Western allies were taken by surprise by Russia's lightning conquest. It took them nearly a year to cobble together sanctions, none of which were severe enough to force Mr. Putin to reverse himself. Mr. Blinken, who worked for Mr. Biden, then the vice president, pushed for the United States to send Javelin antitank missiles to Ukrainian troops. But President Barack Obama, fearing a cycle of escalation with Moscow, resisted. Gathering foreign policy experts at a White House dinner in September 2014, Mr. Obama asked, "Will somebody tell me: What's the American stake in Ukraine?" Those memories stuck with Mr. Biden, who as vice president had visited Kyiv several times. Now, as president, he viewed Ukraine as a chance to reassert YYY leadership on the world stage - a role that had become tarnished after his administration's chaotic, bloodstained departure from Afghanistan. American diplomats had held hundreds of meetings with European officials since Russia began massing troops in the fall. In a striking break from practice, the C.I.A. disclosed detailed intelligence about Mr. Putin's war plans, including so-called false-flag operations that Russia could use as a pretext to strike. That stripped Russia of any element of surprise, even if it did not cause Mr. Putin to rethink his course. While the Pentagon is not sending soldiers into the fray, its top generals are deeply immersed in trying to anticipate Russia's military maneuvers. Gen. Mark A. Milley, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, carries around a map of Ukraine, marked with tactical details. With aides, he drills down for details about the location and combat readiness of specific Russian ground units and ship movements. Hours after the Russians attacked on Feb. 24, Defense Secretary XXX called his Ukrainian counterpart, XXX, to reassure him that YYY support for Ukraine's independence and territorial integrity was "unwavering," and that new supplies of Javelins and Stinger missiles were on the way. The next day, the White House approved another $350 million package of weapons and equipment for Ukraine that Pentagon officials said began flowing within days - lightning speed, as arms shipments go. "The United States will defend every inch of NATO territory with the full force of American power," Mr. Biden said. But he added, "Let me say it again: Our forces are not and will not be engaged in the conflict with Russia in Ukraine." As the images of burning buildings and fleeing Ukrainians filled screens around the world, the ripple effects of Russia's invasion spread far beyond government ministries. For multinational companies like Apple, Google, BP and Shell, the costs of doing business in Russia suddenly became untenable. Apple halted sales of iPhones and iPads, prompting a social media video of a Russian man smashing his iPad with a hammer. Google's parent, Alphabet, said YouTube, which it owns, would suspend advertising on channels affiliated with state-funded Russian media groups. Google Maps stopped displaying real-time traffic information in Ukraine for fear that it could jeopardize the safety of people there. It was a turnabout from previous episodes when Google and Apple acquiesced to Russia's demand to alter how their digital maps demarcated the disputed Crimean Peninsula after Russia annexed it. Last year, both yielded to Russian pressure and removed an app created by allies of the jailed dissident leader Aleksei A. Navalny that was meant to coordinate protest voting during a parliamentary election. But Google's actions did not go far enough to satisfy European Union officials. In a video call, they urged Alphabet and YouTube's chief executives to remove two Russian state-owned news agencies, RT and YYY, from YouTube altogether. Two days later, they did so. Western oil giants were coming to a similar recognition. BP's chief executive, XXX, knew his company would have to walk away from its $14 billion stake in Rosneft, a state-controlled Russian oil company, almost as soon as the invasion began, according to people with knowledge of the company. Two days after Russia attacked, Mr. XXX held a videoconference with Britain's business minister, XXX, who expressed the government's concerns. By Sunday afternoon, BP's board voted to exit the Rosneft holding, ending a foray into the rough-and-tumble world of Russian oil and gas that dated to 2003. The prospect of Mr. XXX serving on the same board as XXX, the chief executive of Rosneft and a longtime confidant of Mr. Putin's, would not have sat well with either the British government or people who fill up at BP's gas stations. There is no obvious buyer for BP's Russian stake, and the company warned that the divestiture would force it to take a large write-off in the first quarter. But BP has diversified aggressively into renewable energy like wind and solar power - making its Russian adventure, about which shareholders have long been leery, less central to its fortunes. "They needed to make a move because otherwise they would face a lot of reputational issues at home and globally," said XXX, who leads the Russia and Central and Eastern Europe practice at Global Counsel, a London-based consulting firm. The most quoted Russian in the heart of Europe right now is not Vladimir Putin, but XXX: "There are weeks where decades happen." Ten days after a desperate Mr. Zelensky asked the world what it was waiting for, the world responded on a global scale and with dizzying speed. In gestures small and not so small, individuals and institutions stood up to Russia's aggression and expressed solidarity with Ukraine. In the process, NATO has been revitalized, the United States has reclaimed a mantle of leadership that some feared had vanished in Iraq and Afghanistan, and the European Union has found a unity and purpose that eluded it for most of its existence. "There's never been a time when people from Britain, YYY, France and YYY were prepared to put their lives on the line to defend Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania," Professor XXX of Oxford said. "The question to which European leaders don't yet have an answer is, 'What are we prepared to do for Ukraine in the long term?'" As Mr. Putin presses his lethal military advance, the unthinkable has already happened. Now it gives way to the unknowable. Huddled in the Kyiv Subway, Three to a Mattress KYIV, Ukraine - As the escalator glides down the final few yards into the subway stop deep in Kyiv's normally immaculate mass transit system, a sprawl of foam mattresses, suitcases and plastic bags filled with food comes into view. The space is surprisingly quiet, almost silent, despite the 200 or so people camped there to escape the bombing and artillery fire above. They sleep three or four to a single mattress. The children push toy cars over the gray granite slabs of the station floors, watching their mothers scroll endlessly on their cellphones, searching for news of the war. Little hands and feet stick out from underneath blankets, though it is noticeably warmer in the station than above ground. Volunteers come and go, bringing food and other necessities of life. One mother sets up a tent, for a modicum of privacy. "It's not so comfortable," admitted XXX, who is 9 and has been living in Dorohozhychi station with her mother and their cat for six days now. "But you see, this is the situation, and we just have to put up with it. It's better to be here than to get into a situation outside." As many as 15,000 people, the city's mayor said Wednesday, most of them women and children, have taken up residence in Kyiv's subway system to escape the grim conditions in the city as Russian forces bear down. And the subway is not the only subterranean refuge. Doctors at Maternity Hospital No. 5 in Kyiv, for example, have set up chambers in the basement to provide women a safe place to give birth. So far, five babies have been born in this way, said XXX, the clinic's director. Six days into the conflict, the Kremlin's war plans remain unclear. The movements of tanks, artillery guns, armored personnel carriers and other heavy weaponry toward Kyiv, with a population of about 2.8 million before the exodus of evacuees, is raising grave alarms about the potential onset of bloody street fighting. But Russia might instead settle on a grinding siege punctuated with shelling and the cutting off of food supplies, water and ammunition in hopes of breaking the resistance without the destruction and killing of a frontal attack. Either way, life underground in Kyiv, already difficult, is likely to get even harder. Above ground, Ukrainian soldiers and volunteers who had been handed rifles just a few days ago were busy preparing for the Russians' arrival. Preparations were evident on nearly every street: concrete barriers blocked roadways, tires to set alight to form smoke screens lay everywhere and, in a new development Wednesday, signs warning of antitank mines dotted roads hastily closed to civilian cars. A bullet-riddled S.U.V. lay abandoned on the side of a road near a checkpoint manned by civilian volunteers, apparently after having raised suspicions that it was carrying Russian saboteurs. A cold, slushy snow fell, and the thud of explosions could be heard somewhere on the city's outskirts. Though most people in Kyiv remain in their apartments, thousands have chosen to hide from the dangers above by taking cover in the subway system. They have lived for days in cramped, communal conditions, women and children of all ages, along with men too old to join the fighting above. XXX, a veterinarian, 45, and her daughter, XXX, 18, a university ecology student, have been taking turns sleeping on a coveted wooden bench in the Dorohozhychi stop. "This is our space," Ms. XXX said. Nearby, people crowded around a hastily improvised cellphone charging station. Fortunately, the subway system has well appointed public restrooms. The stop is deep in the system's green line - the escalator ride to the station takes about a minute - and the stops ahead sound promising: the Palace of Sports, the Golden Gate, the Caves and Friendship of the Peoples. Yet, while trains do still run sporadically, nobody here was going anywhere. "It's bad for the children," Ms. XXX said, surveying the scene. "I am just a veterinarian, not a doctor, but I can understand how bad this is for them. They are under stress. They cry at night." Ms. XXX said she had been under such stress that she hardly slept. And she was seething with anger at the man who started the war, President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia. "I don't want to swear," she said. "I just hate that man with all my soul. Look how much pain he brought us." Ukrainian officials have in recent days pleaded with Western nations to intervene by imposing a no-fly zone over Ukraine, a request that has been rebuffed, because it would risk sparking direct conflict between NATO and Russian forces. But Ms. XXX liked the idea. "Please close the sky," she said. Warning signs of Russia's intentions had been clear for years, not just during the military buildup that began last fall, she said. "I don't understand why the world didn't listen to Ukraine before." Estimates of civilian casualties are unreliable, easily manipulated by both sides in the information sector of the war. A Ukrainian government agency that oversees fire departments and rescue services said in a statement Wednesday that 2,000 people had died. But the agency later issued a correction, saying, in what may be the most reliable account, that it had no idea how many people had been killed. Earlier estimates were in the hundreds. XXX, the human rights ombudsman in the Ukrainian Parliament, issued a statement saying that 21 children had been killed and another 55 injured. In the subway stop, XXX, a lawyer who had worked in Kyiv's now moribund real estate market, moved into the subway stop with her daughter, XXX, last Thursday evening, the first day of the war. By chance, her 6-year-old son had been staying with his grandmother outside Kyiv when the Russian incursion began. They made it out and are now in Germany. Her husband, a career military man, is fighting with the Ukrainian army. She was glad her son was safe, she said. "But I wish I were near to him now." Once a YYY, Ukraine's West Tastes Violence LUTSK, Ukraine - Men in camouflage, hardened by battle, sniffled as a Ukrainian Orthodox choir sang the haunting funeral mass. One man put his arm around another as tears welled in his eyes. "The glory and freedom of Ukraine has not yet perished," said the priest during the funeral rites on Saturday for two of the four soldiers who died when the city's military airfield was bombed before dawn on Friday. "For 30 years we were singing these words and saying we would suffer for our freedom, but we could not have imagined these words would become our reality, that we would have to send our sons to defend us against our neighbors," Father XXX, the priest, said. The Russian invasion of Ukraine is now in its third week. With the four deaths at the airfield, it arrived in YYY, a provincial capital only 55 miles from Poland. It was a rare attack in the West by a Russian military that has focused primarily in the South, North and around Ukraine's capital, Kyiv. For weeks, Western Ukraine has been a safe haven for millions of Ukrainians who have fled battle zones, as well as businessmen, journalists, diplomats and others. But with bombings in YYY and another Western city, YYY, early Friday, violence and death pierced the sense of security that many had taken for granted. "There is no peaceful town in Ukraine any more," said XXX, 43, who stood outside on the town square listening as speakers broadcast the funeral taking place in the Church of the Holy Trinity in front of her. She acknowledged that for now they face less peril than other cities like Kharkiv, which has been under assault for two weeks, and Mariupol, the country's most pressing humanitarian emergency, saying "we are pretty OK." But she was distressed that Matvii, a blue-eyed, seven-month-old baby being carried by a woman next to her, "already knows what sirens are and already knows they mean we have to go to a bomb shelter." Ukraine's vast western region has stirred more concern in recent days following intermittent reports that Belarus, only 90 miles to the north, might begin to commit forces to the war. That worried XXX residents because of Belarus's proximity and the unpredictability of its autocratic leader, XXX, an ally of Russian President Vladimir V. Putin. The region's role as a corridor for weapons being delivered from Europe and the United States may also make it a target. On Saturday Russia's deputy foreign minister XXX said on Russian television that he had warned the United States that convoys with weapons sent to Ukraine would be "legitimate targets" for the Russian military. Some residents worry that in addition to the convoys, the Kremlin has its sights set on this territory. "I believe his aim is to reach the border with Poland - the NATO border," said XXX, a surgeon who declined to give his last name out of fear for his security, referring to Mr. Putin. Ms. XXX said that she is worried that Ukraine could soon lose its ability to protect its airspace. "Our borders are being defended by border guards and our land is being kept safe by our defenders, but our sky is not protected," she said, echoing calls for NATO to establish a no-fly zone above Ukraine. XXX's airfield was bombed on Feb. 24, the first day of the invasion, but it did not completely destroy the airfield and no one was killed. The city, like much of the country's west, had not expected Russian military activity to escalate, at least not yet. On Friday, when the attacks occurred, an early warning system did not go off because the Russian rockets had flown "super slow," said the mayor, XXX. "I think this type of attack is to raise fear, increase the level of panic and to strengthen the position of YYY in possible negotiations with Ukraine," he said. XXX, a political and military analyst at the Democratic Initiatives Foundation, said that Russia may move its troops westward, but that a full attack was still not possible - "just yet" - until Russian soldiers gain a stronger foothold in central Ukraine. However, she predicted that Russian forces will continue attacking military targets in Ukraine's west because even if other countries donate fighter jets, the country will not be able to use them if there are no airfields from which they can fly. "It is important for Ukraine to receive support before Russia achieves its goals in the west," she underlined. Western Ukraine has a different history than the east, which has historically been closer to Russia and where more people consider themselves ethnic Russians and native Russian speakers - the people Mr. Putin has claimed are a natural part of Russia. In YYY, more than 90 percent of the population is composed of ethnic Ukrainians, according to the most recent census, from 2001. XXX and the region of western Ukraine are now home to many displaced Ukrainians from the east and south; the population of YYY and its surroundings, which the mayor estimated at about 250,000, has grown by 10,000 alone. And it will play a crucial role on the corridor through which humanitarian aid will be disbursed, said Ms. XXX. XXX's residents have been getting ready for a potential arrival of Russian troops, whenever it may come. "We have prepared to the max," said Mr. XXX. "We have been able to buy enough food in case of a humanitarian catastrophe. We have 40,000 cubic meters of water in our reserves. And our residents have made at least 25,000 molotov cocktails since the war began." The mayor himself said he made "too many to count." A reserve battalion of 4,000 volunteers is ready to buttress both the military forces and the territorial defense, a loosely organized part of the Ukrainian Army that consists of various paramilitary groups. Ordinary citizens are also learning what it means to live in wartime. At a basement classroom usually used as a chess club, 19-year-old XXX was showing civilians how to shoot a rifle. "Everybody wants to learn how to hold a weapon properly," said Mr. XXX, who joined the Ukrainian army in 2020 and had been serving near Mariupol, which is now surrounded by Russian forces. "God forbid we will soon face a similar situation as the one being experienced in eastern regions." At the training session, people asked questions about how far shrapnel from a grenade could fly. Then they took turns learning how to load five bullets into XXX. The weapons are from the 1960s and '70s - too old for combat, but usable for training. Mr. XXX said he also gives lessons about strategy, tactics, and first aid. His presentation was preceded by a talk from a psychologist about relaxation techniques and coping mechanisms for dealing with panic attacks. The classes are every day at 1 o'clock, said XXX, a volunteer, and usually draw between 150 and 200 people every day. He was previously a coordinator in a youth center, where he organized lessons in patriotic education. At the funeral on Saturday, the priest prayed to god for "victory over the enemy." "There is a Christian commandment, 'Thou shall not kill,'" Father XXX said near the end of his sermon eulogy. But the Russian attackers "deserve to die here," he said. "And tomorrow we will defend our motherland so that we do not become slaves." Later in the day at Holy Trinity Church, in the evening, a soldier who was defending XXX's airport planned to get married - a sign that life goes on amid the looming threat of battle. Putin puts nuclear forces on high alert, escalating tensions KYIV, Ukraine - President Vladimir Putin dramatically escalated East-West tensions by ordering Russian nuclear forces put on high alert Sunday, while Ukraine's embattled leader agreed to talks with Moscow as Putin's troops and tanks drove deeper into the country, closing in around the capital. Citing "aggressive statements" by NATO and tough financial sanctions, Putin issued a directive to increase the readiness of Russia's nuclear weapons, raising fears that the invasion of Ukraine could lead to nuclear war, whether by design or mistake. The Russian leader is "potentially putting in play forces that, if there's a miscalculation, could make things much, much more dangerous," said a senior U.S. defense official, speaking on condition of anonymity to discuss rapidly unfolding military operations. Putin's directive came as Russian forces encountered strong resistance from Ukraine defenders. Moscow has so far failed to win full control of Ukraine's airspace, despite advances across the country. U.S. officials say they believe the invasion has been more difficult, and slower, than the Kremlin envisioned, though that could change as Moscow adapts. Amid the mounting tensions, Western nations said they would tighten sanctions and buy and deliver weapons for Ukraine, including Stinger missiles for shooting down helicopters and other aircraft. Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy's office, meanwhile, announced plans for a meeting with a Russian delegation at an unspecified location on the Belarusian border. It wasn't immediately clear when the meeting would take place, nor what the Kremlin was ultimately seeking, either in those potential talks on the border or, more broadly, from its war in Ukraine. Western officials believe Putin wants to overthrow Ukraine's government and replace it with a regime of his own, reviving Moscow's Cold War-era influence. The fast-moving developments came as scattered fighting was reported in Kyiv. Battles also broke out in Ukraine's second-largest city, Kharkiv, and strategic ports in the country's south came under assault from Russian forces. By late Sunday, Russian forces had taken YYY, a Ukrainian city of 100,000 on the Azov Sea coast, according to XXX, an adviser to Zelenskyy's office. Russian troops also made advances toward Kherson, another city in the south of Ukraine, while Mariupol, a port city on the Sea of Azov that is considered a prime Russian target, is "hanging on," XXX said. With Russian troops closing in around Kyiv, a city of almost 3 million, the mayor of the capital expressed doubt that civilians could be evacuated. Authorities have been handing out weapons to anyone willing to defend the city. Ukraine is also releasing prisoners with military experience who want to fight, and training people to make firebombs. In Mariupol, where Ukrainians were trying to fend off attack, a medical team at a city hospital desperately tried to revive a 6-year-old girl in unicorn pajamas who was mortally wounded in Russian shelling. During the rescue attempt, a doctor in blue medical scrubs, pumping oxygen into the girl, looked directly into the Associated Press video camera capturing the scene. "Show this to Putin," he said angrily. "The eyes of this child, and crying doctors." Their resuscitation efforts failed, and the girl lay dead on a gurney, her jacket spattered with blood. Nearly 900 kilometers (560 miles) away, XXX was under threat in the city of Chernihiv. "I wish I had never lived to see this," said XXX, an 87-year-old Jewish survivor of World War II. She said sirens blare almost constantly in the city, about 150 kilometers (90 miles) from Kyiv. Chernihiv residents have been told not to switch on any lights "so we don't draw their attention," said XXX, who has been living in a hallway, away from any windows, so she could better protect herself. "The window glass constantly shakes, and there is this constant thundering noise," she said. Meanwhile, the top official in the European Union outlined plans by the 27-nation bloc to close its airspace to Russian airlines and buy weapons for Ukraine. The EU will also ban some pro-Kremlin media outlets, said European Commission President XXX. The U.S. also stepped up the flow of weapons to Ukraine, announcing it will send Stinger missiles as part of a package approved by the White House on Friday. Germany likewise plans to send 500 Stingers and other military supplies. Also, the 193-member U.N. General Assembly scheduled an emergency session Monday on Russia's invasion. Putin, in ordering the nuclear alert, cited not only statements by NATO members but the hard-hitting financial sanctions imposed by the West against Russia, including Putin himself. "Western countries aren't only taking unfriendly actions against our country in the economic sphere, but top officials from leading NATO members made aggressive statements regarding our country," Putin said in televised comments. U.S. defense officials would not disclose their current nuclear alert level except to say that the military is prepared all times to defend its homeland and allies. White House press secretary XXX told ABC that Putin is resorting to the pattern he used in the weeks before the invasion, "which is to manufacture threats that don't exist in order to justify further aggression." The practical meaning of Putin's order was not immediately clear. Russia and the United States typically have land- and submarine-based nuclear forces that are on alert and prepared for combat at all times, but nuclear-capable bombers and other aircraft are not. If Putin is arming or otherwise raising the nuclear combat readiness of his bombers, or if he is ordering more ballistic missile submarines to sea, then the U.S. might feel compelled to respond in kind, said XXX, a nuclear analyst at the Federation of American Scientists. Earlier Sunday, Kyiv was eerily quiet after explosions lit up the morning sky and authorities reported blasts at one airport. A main boulevard was practically deserted as a strict curfew kept people off the streets. Authorities warned that anyone venturing out without a pass would be considered a Russian saboteur. Terrified residents hunkered down in homes, underground garages and subway stations in anticipation of a full-scale Russian assault. Food and medicine were running low, Kyiv Mayor XXX said. "Right now, the most important question is to defend our country," XXX said. In downtown Kharkiv, 86-year-old Olena Dudnik said she and her husband were nearly thrown from their bed by the pressure blast of a nearby explosion. "We are suffering immensely," she said by phone. "We don't have much food in the pantry, and I worry the stores aren't going to have anything either, if they reopen." She added: "I just want the shooting to stop, people to stop being killed." Russia's failure thus far to win full control of Ukraine's airspace is a surprising lapse that has given outgunned Ukrainian forces a chance to slow the advance of Russian ground forces. Normally, gaining what the military calls air superiority is one of the first priorities for an invading force. But even though Russian troops are being slowed by Ukrainian resistance, fuel shortages and other logistical problems, a senior U.S. defense official said that will probably change. "We are in day four. The Russians will learn and adapt," the official said. The number of casualties from Europe's largest land conflict since World War II remained unclear amid the confusion. Ukraine's Interior Ministry said Sunday that 352 Ukrainian civilians have been killed, including 14 children. It said an additional 1,684 people, including 116 children, have been wounded. Russian Defense Ministry spokesman XXX. Gen. XXX gave no figures on Russia's dead and wounded but said Sunday his country's losses were "many times" lower than Ukraine's. About 368,000 Ukrainians have arrived in neighboring countries since the invasion started Thursday, according to the U.N. refugee agency. Along with military assistance, the U.S., European Union and Britain also agreed to block selected Russian banks from the SWIFT system, which moves money around thousands of banks and other financial institutions worldwide. They also moved to slap restrictions on Russia's central bank. Russia's economy has taken a pounding since the invasion, with the ruble plunging and the central bank calling for calm to avoid bank runs. Russia, which massed almost 200,000 troops along Ukraine's borders, claims its assault is aimed only at military targets, but bridges, schools and residential neighborhoods have also been hit. Woman Captured in Iconic Image Dies The image captured the suffering and chaos of the war in Ukraine in an instant: a pale pregnant woman clutching her belly as she was carried on a stretcher, the red-and-black polka dot sheet under her a stark contrast to the smoking soil, stripped trees and blasted-out maternity hospital around her. The scene that followed a Russian missile strike on the hospital in the besieged city of Mariupol last week was documented by journalists from the news agency The Associated Press. It was published on the front pages of newspapers, including The New York Times, a grim symbol of how Russia's campaign in Ukraine was increasingly targeting civilians. On Monday The A.P. said it had learned that the woman in the photo and her baby had died. With internet connections severed, phone lines cut and cellular service disabled, The A.P. is one of the few news organizations still able to report from Mariupol. In an article published on Monday, The A.P. said that after the Russian strike on March 9, the woman was taken to another hospital. Realizing that she was losing her baby, the news organization said, she pleaded with medics: "Kill me now!" Neither the woman nor her baby could be saved. The hospital workers did not get her name, The A.P. reported, before her husband and father retrieved her body. Responding to worldwide condemnation of the strike, Russian officials argued that the hospital had been commandeered as a base by Ukrainian forces. Moscow's ambassador to the United Nations dismissed the A.P. images as "fake news." Eastern Europe Unites in Fear Of Putin's Aims PODBORSKO, Poland - Scattered around the forest in Poland like archaeological ruins, the crumbling concrete bunkers for decades stored Soviet nuclear warheads. Today, they store only memories - deeply painful for Poland, joyous for the Kremlin - of the vanished empire that President Vladimir V. Putin wants to rebuild, starting with his war in Ukraine. "Nobody here trusted the Russians before and we certainly don't trust them now," said XXX, a former Polish soldier who oversees the once top-secret nuclear site. The bunkers were abandoned by the Soviet military in 1990 as Moscow's hegemony over East and Central Europe unraveled in what President Putin has described as "the greatest geopolitical catastrophe of the century." Now Eastern European countries fear a catastrophe of their own could be in the making, as Mr. Putin seeks to turn back the clock and reclaim Russia's lost sphere of influence, perilously close to their frontiers. Even leaders in the region who have long supported Mr. Putin are sounding the alarm. Warnings about Moscow's intentions, often dismissed until last Thursday's invasion of Ukraine as "Russophobia" by those without experience of living in proximity to Russia, are now widely accepted as prescient. And while there has been debate about whether efforts to expand NATO into the former Soviet bloc were a provocation to Mr. Putin, his assault on Ukraine has left countries that joined the American-led military alliance convinced they made the right decision. A Russian attack on Poland or other former members of the defunct Warsaw Pact that now belong to NATO is still highly unlikely but Mr. Putin has "made the unthinkable possible," warned XXX, the foreign minister of Lithuania, Poland's neighbor to the north. "We live in a new reality. If Putin is not stopped he will go further," Mr. XXX said in an interview. His country, bordering both Russia and its ally XXX, has declared a state of emergency. Prime Minister XXX of Poland gave his own warning of perhaps worse to come. "We should be under no illusions: this could be just the beginning," he wrote in the Financial Times. "Tomorrow Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia, as well as Poland, could be next in line." Fear that Mr. Putin is capable of just about anything, even using nuclear weapons, is just "common sense," said Toomas Ilves, a former president of Estonia. Mr. XXX announced this week on Twitter that he was "accepting apologies" for all the "patronizing nonsense from Western Europeans" who complained that "we Estonians were paranoid about Russian behavior." In a telephone interview, Mr. XXX said he had not received any apologies yet but was gratified to see Russia's "shills and useful idiots getting their comeuppance." Western Europeans who once scoffed at his dark view of Russia, he added, "have suddenly become East Europeans" in their fearful attitudes. "This past week marks the end of a 30-year-long error that we can all come together and sing kumbaya." Memories of Soviet hegemony over what is now NATO's eastern flank - imposed after the Red Army liberated the region from Nazi occupation at the end of World War II - vary from country to country depending on history, geography and convoluted domestic political struggles. For Poland, a nation repeatedly invaded by Russia over the centuries, they are of humiliation and oppression. Baltic states, extinguished as independent nations by XXX in 1940 and dragooned at gunpoint into the Soviet Union, feel much the same way. Others have fonder recollections, particularly YYY, where pro-Russian sentiment has long run deep, at least until last week, and YYY, which has for centuries seen Russia as its protector. Mr. Putin's war to bring Ukraine to heel, however, has united the region in alarm, with even YYY voicing dismay. On Monday, YYY's prime minister fired his defense minister, who caused outrage by suggesting that the conflict in Ukraine should not be called a war but "a special military operation," the Kremlin's euphemism for its invasion. Only XXX, the belligerent, pro-Kremlin leader of YYY's ethnic Serbian enclave, Republika YYY, has shown any sympathy for Mr. Putin's war, stating that Russia's reasons for its invasion "were received with understanding." Outrage over Russian aggression, even in countries historically sympathetic to Moscow, has derailed years of work by Russian diplomats and intelligence operatives to cultivate allies like XXX, an ultranationalist political party in YYY that is so close to Russia that it once launched its election campaign in Moscow. Even YYY's prime minister, XXX, who usually delights in defying fellow European leaders and stood with Mr. Putin last month in the Kremlin, has now endorsed a raft of sanctions imposed on Russia by the European bloc. He is still blocking transport of weapons into Ukraine across YYY's border but has curbed his previously gushing enthusiasm for Mr. Putin. So, too, has XXX, the previously Kremlin-friendly president of YYY. "I admit I was wrong," Mr. XXX said this week. In Poland, traditionally one of the most anti-Russian countries in the region, the populist governing party, XXX and Justice, has gone almost overnight from aligning itself with Moscow in its hostility to L.G.B.T.Q. rights and the defense of traditional values to become one of Mr. Putin's most robust critics, offering its territory for the delivery of weapons into Ukraine and taking in more than 450,000 Ukrainians who have fled the war. Gas stations and A.T.M.s in southeastern Poland along the border with Ukraine have been besieged in recent days by people worried that they might need to get out fast. That possibility hit home on Monday evening when missiles slammed into a Ukrainian village just a few miles from the frontier, rattling windows in nearby houses on the Polish side. Just two weeks before Russian troops poured into Ukraine, Poland's prime minister, Mr. XXX, joined Mr. XXX and Marine Le Pen, the far-right French presidential candidate who has frequently spoken up for Russia, at a meeting in YYY focused on attacking the European Union and its liberal attitudes on immigration. In recent days, however, Mr. XXX has dropped the hostility to the European bloc to focus instead on opposing the Kremlin. He has lobbied for tough sanctions on Russia, traveling to Berlin to personally "shake Germany's conscience" and nudge it toward a dramatic U-turn in its policy toward Russia. On a recent visit to Warsaw, Defense Secretary XXX hailed Poland as "one of our most stalwart allies." On Friday, Poland hosted a summit meeting with nine regional leaders to rally opposition to Russia's invasion and discuss ways to help Ukraine. "We have woken up to a completely new reality," the Polish president, XXX, told the gathering, lamenting that it had taken a Russian invasion to interrupt "the peaceful sleep of wealthy Europeans." A nation of Slavs like Ukraine, Poland has long been viewed as a wayward family member by more messianic-minded Russian nationalists, whose views Mr. Putin channeled last week in his justification for the war. Russia's foreign minister recently sneered at Poland and other new NATO members as "territories orphaned" by the collapse of the Warsaw Pact and the Soviet Union. To demonstrate that Poland has no desire to rejoin what Moscow imagines as its happy, obedient but sadly divided family, the mayor of Warsaw announced on Tuesday that refugees from Ukraine would be housed in apartment blocks built during the Cold War to house Soviet diplomats and left abandoned since because of legal disputes over ownership. Few people expect Russia to try and bring Poles back into a Moscow-dominated Slavic "family" by force, as it is now trying to do with Ukrainians. Doing that, said XXX, director of research at the Casimir Pulaski Foundation, a research group in Warsaw, "would mean that Putin has gone totally mad." At the former Soviet warhead bunker in YYY, northwestern Poland, Mr. XXX said he never really expected the Russians to try to retake their lost, Soviet-era military outposts. But he still wondered why, just before pulling out of YYY with its nuclear weapons, the Soviet military drew up a maintenance schedule for cranes used to lift warheads and other equipment at the facility stretching years into the future. "It seems they did not think they were leaving forever," Mr. XXX said, standing in a cavernous underground hall once crammed with warheads and long off limits to all but Soviet officers. In its attitude toward Poland, he added, Russia has always acted "like a master toward a servant," a relationship that it is now trying to impose on Ukraine. "I worry that Putin may want to get hold of Poland and the Baltic states, too," he said. Despite Talks, XXX Devastation Mounts LONDON - Diplomatic activity quickened on multiple fronts Monday as Russia's war on Ukraine entered an uncertain new phase, with President Vladimir V. Putin's forces widening their bombardment of Kyiv and other cities, hundreds of civilians escaping the devastated port of Mariupol, and the United States warning China over its deepening alignment with an isolated Russia. There were no breakthroughs, either at the negotiating tables or on the battlefield. But as the human cost of the war continued to mount, the flurry of developments suggested that people were groping for a way out of the crisis - or, failing that, for ways to prevent it from mutating into a wider proxy war. In YYY, President Biden's top national security aide, XXX, met with a top Chinese foreign affairs official, XXX, to try to peel away one of Mr. Putin's few potential allies, after reports - denied by Moscow and Beijing - that Russia had sought military aid from China, and that Chinese leaders were open to such a request. Mr. XXX, a Biden administration official said, had expressed "deep concerns" about "China's alignment at this time." Ukrainian and Russian officials held another round of direct negotiations, adjourning without signs of progress, though they agreed to meet again on Tuesday. The negotiations unfolded against a backdrop of thunderous Russian artillery strikes that led the secretary general of the United Nations, XXX, to declare Ukraine was "being decimated before the eyes of the world." An uncharacteristically angry Mr. XXX accused Russia of attacking 24 health facilities and leaving hundreds of thousands of people without water or electricity. Having once predicted there would be no war in Ukraine, he now warned there could be a calamitous cascade of world hunger and food inflation because Ukraine is one of the world's foremost grain producers. The impact on civilians, Mr. XXX said, was "reaching terrifying proportions." President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine plans to address the U.S. Congress on Wednesday in a virtual speech that could increase pressure on the Biden administration to send fighter jets to Kyiv. In one of dozens of episodes of violence in Ukraine, a missile slammed into an apartment block in a once-tranquil Kyiv neighborhood just after dawn on Monday, when many residents were asleep. They had become accustomed to the percussive noise of shelling after more than two weeks of Russian bombardment, but never thought their building would be hit. "We do not have a military target near us," said XXX, 30. "We did not think we ourselves would be a target." Yet amid the drumbeat of horror, there were also glimpses of resilience. Hundreds escaped Mariupol by car, according to the local government, even as a convoy of vehicles carrying food, water and medicine tried to find a safe path through the battle that has been raging around that southeast port city almost since the war began. Relatives of those still living in Mariupol said fleeing seemed to offer the best, perhaps only, chance for survival. "I do not believe the humanitarian convoy will be a big help," said XXX, a humanitarian activist whose parents were in Mariupol. "Too many people are still there. And this once beautiful, big and constantly developing city is now completely destroyed. It is not possible to live there anymore." An estimated 400,000 people are trapped in Mariupol, which is entering its second week without heat, food or clean water. Attempts to reach the city and evacuate people have failed day after day amid heavy fighting. The convoy en route Monday was carrying 100 tons of relief supplies, officials said. Russia has been laying siege to the city, a major industrial hub on the Azov Sea, creating a humanitarian catastrophe that led the International Committee of the Red Cross to issue an urgent appeal for a cease-fire to assist the hundreds of thousands of people with no access to clean water, food or heat. "Dead bodies, of civilians and combatants, remain trapped under the rubble or lying in the open where they fell," the I.C.R.C. said. Casualty figures are difficult to confirm in the conflict. The United Nations has estimated that at least 596 civilians have been killed, but that figure is considered low because of the organization's inability to gain access to all areas of fighting. Ukrainian officials have said more than 2,500 people have died in Mariupol alone. Particularly striking was the death of a pregnant woman who had been photographed clutching her belly as she was carried on a stretcher from a blasted-out maternity hospital that had been attacked. The split-screen images of slow-moving diplomacy and sudden, brutal attacks on many civilian targets underscored the challenges of finding an acceptable off-ramp for Mr. Putin, even after a campaign that, by nearly all accounts, has gone far worse for Russia than expected. The Kremlin, confronting a remarkably determined Ukrainian resistance and heavy losses on the battlefield, vowed to carry out its subjugation of the country "in full" and on its original schedule. (It is unclear what that schedule is, though Russia denied, until just before the invasion, that it had any plan to send troops into Ukraine.) Russian officials have tried to portray their military's failure to capture most major cities in Ukraine as an act of restraint. Responding to Western claims that Russian forces were making "slow progress" in large cities, the Kremlin spokesman, XXX, said that Mr. Putin had ordered Russian troops to "refrain from storming large cities including Kyiv" before the Feb. 24 invasion. The reason, he said, was that "armed clashes in urban areas would inevitably lead to big losses among civilians." But he added that the cities are "already practically encircled anyway." Interpreting Mr. XXX's statements was difficult, but they did not appear to foreclose the possibility of a negotiated settlement. On Monday, Mr. Putin spoke again with Prime Minister XXX of Israel, continuing Israel's efforts to mediate. The 90-minute call focused on the possibility of a cease-fire, a senior Israeli official said, and followed a call between Mr. XXX and President Zelensky of Ukraine on Saturday evening. The prospect of China's involvement in support of Russia, however, raises the risks of a conflict that has already threatened to pull in the West. It would blunt the impact of a trans-Atlantic campaign to isolate Russia, relieving some of the economic pressure on Mr. Putin and giving him a potential supplier of weapons to counteract those flowing in to Ukrainian troops from the United States and other NATO countries. "It really risks making Ukraine a proxy conflict in what could be a broader geopolitical competition between China and Russia on the one side with the U.S. and its allies on the other," said XXX, a professor of Asian Studies at Georgetown University and former China policymaker in the Obama administration. Mr. XXX's seven-hour meeting with Mr. XXX had been scheduled long before the invasion, but it came one day after American officials told reporters about the request from Moscow for assistance from Beijing - a test of a new commitment to work together pledged by Mr. Putin and President Xi Jinping at the opening of the Beijing Winter Olympics last month. American intelligence agencies learned of the Russian request in recent days. It appears the request may include drones, secure communications and financial support, American officials said, though the details are unclear. The United States told allies in diplomatic cables that China had given a positive signal to Russia, a European official said on Monday, speaking on the condition of anonymity because of the sensitivity of the exchanges, which were first reported by the Financial Times. Mr. XXX was "direct about those concerns and the potential implications and consequences of certain actions," an administration official said. But the official refused to give specifics about the exchange with Mr. XXX, a former Chinese ambassador to the United States. China, which has urged a peaceful resolution to the conflict and has maintained good relations with Ukraine, has denied receiving any request for help from Moscow. But with much of the rest of the world cutting off trade, financial transactions and other economic interactions with Russia, which threatens to plunge the country into default, Mr. Putin is clearly counting on his relationship with Mr. Xi to help him resist the overwhelming economic pressure - and to perhaps emerge as a critical military ally. Clearly, the leak of the intelligence that Russia sought China's help was designed to pressure both sides. It was humiliating for Mr. Putin, who is enormously sensitive to suggestions that he is the junior partner in the relationship between Moscow and Beijing. But it also places China in a hard spot. Just before Russia's invasion, China's foreign minister, XXX, left no doubt that Beijing opposed military action. "The sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of any country should be respected and safeguarded," he said. "Ukraine is no exception." If China provided military or economic support, it would be violating that principle and risk being associated with the carnage now underway. The White House has made clear it would respond to any effort to bail out Russia. "Support of any kind," said Mr. Biden's spokeswoman, XXX, "there would be consequences for that." Ukraine refugee count tops 1 million; Russians besiege ports KYIV, Ukraine - More than 1 million people have fled Ukraine following Russia's invasion, in the swiftest refugee exodus this century, the United Nations said Thursday, as Moscow said it was ready for more talks to end fighting even as its forces pressed their assaults on the country's second-largest city and two strategic seaports. The tally the U.N. refugee agency released to The Associated Press was reached Wednesday and amounts to more than 2% of Ukraine's population being forced out of the country in seven days. The mass evacuation could be seen in Kharkiv, a city of about 1.5 million people where residents desperate to escape falling shells and bombs crowded the city's train station and pressed onto trains, not always knowing where they were headed. With a column of tanks and other vehicles apparently stalled for days outside the capital of Kyiv, fighting continued on multiple fronts across Ukraine. A second round of talks aimed at ending the fighting was expected later Thursday in neighboring Belarus - though the two sides appeared to have little common ground. "We are ready to conduct talks, but we will continue the operation because we won't allow Ukraine to preserve a military infrastructure that threatens Russia," Russian Foreign Minister XXX said, adding that it would let Ukrainians to choose what government they should have. Lavrov said that the West has continuously armed Ukraine, trained its troops and built up bases there to turn Ukraine into a bulwark against Russia - repeating Russian claims that it has used to justify its operation in Ukraine. The U.S. and its allies have insisted that NATO is a defensive alliance that doesn't pose a threat to Russia. And the West fears Russia's invasion is meant to overthrow Ukraine's government and install a friendly government. Russian forces continued their pressure. Britain's Defense Ministry said Mariupol, a large city on the Azov Sea, was encircled by Russian forces. The status of another vital port, Kherson, a Black Sea shipbuilding city of 280,000, remained unclear. Russia's forces claimed to have taken complete control of Kherson, which would be the biggest city to fall in the invasion thus far. Britain's Defense Ministry said that was possible, though not yet verified. The mayor said there were no Ukrainian forces in the city - but he said the Ukrainian flag was still flying over it. Overnight, Associated Press reporters in Kyiv heard at least one explosion before videos started circulating of apparent strikes on the capital. Russia's Defense Ministry said it had knocked out a reserve broadcasting center in the XXX district, about 7 kilometers (4 miles) south of the government headquarters. It said unspecified precision weapons were used, and that there were no casualties or damage to residential buildings. A statement from the general staff of Ukraine's armed forces didn't address the strikes, saying only that Russian forces were "regrouping" and "trying to reach the northern outskirts" of the city. "The advance on Kyiv has been rather not very organized and now they're more or less stuck," military analyst XXX told the AP in Moscow. At least 227 civilians have been killed and another 525 wounded since the invasion began, according to the latest figures from the office of the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights. Earlier, Ukraine said more than 2,000 civilians have died, a figure that could not be independently verified. The U.N. office uses strict methodology and counts only confirmed casualties, and admits its figures are a vast undercount. Still, the tally eclipses the entire civilian casualty count from the fighting in 2014 in eastern Ukraine between pro-Russian separatists and Ukrainian forces - which left 136 dead and 577 injured. Lavrov voiced regret for civilian casualties, insisting that the military is only using precision weapons against military targets, despite abundant evidence of shelling of homes, schools and hospitals. However, he tacitly acknowledged that some Russian strikes could have killed civilians, saying that "any military action is fraught with casualties, and not just among the military but also civilians." In his latest defiant videotaped address, Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy called on Ukrainians to keep up the resistance. He vowed that the invaders would have "not one quiet moment" and described Russian soldiers as "confused children who have been used." Moscow's isolation deepened when most of the world lined up against it at the United Nations to demand it withdraw from Ukraine. The prosecutor for the International Criminal Court opened an investigation into possible war crimes. And in a stunning reversal, the International Paralympic Committee banned Russian and Belarusian athletes from the Winter Paralympic Games. Felgenhauer said with the Russian economy already suffering, there could be a "serious internal political crisis" if Russian President Vladimir Putin does not find a way to end the war quickly. "There's no real money to run to fight this war," he said, adding that if Putin and the military "are unable to wrap up this campaign very swiftly and victoriously, they're in a pickle." Several parts of the country were under pressure. Ukraine's military said Russian forces "did not achieve the main goal of capturing Mariupol" in its statement, which did not mention the another important port, Kherson, whose status was unclear. Putin's forces claimed to have taken complete control of Kherson, and U.K. Defense Secretary XXX said Thursday that it was "possible - it's not verified yet - that Russia is in control" there. A senior U.S. defense official earlier disputed the Russians controlled the city. "Our view is that Kherson is very much a contested city," the official said, speaking on condition of anonymity. Zelenskyy's office told the AP that it could not comment on the situation in Kherson while the fighting was still going on. The mayor of Kherson, XXX, said Russian soldiers were in the city and came to the city administration building. He said he asked them not to shoot civilians and to allow crews to gather up the bodies from the streets. "We don't have any Ukrainian forces in the city, only civilians and people here who want to LIVE," he said in a statement later posted on Facebook. The mayor said Kherson would maintain a strict 8 p.m.-to-6 a.m. curfew and restrict traffic into the city to food and medicine deliveries. The city will also require pedestrians to walk in groups no larger than two, obey commands to stop and not to "provoke the troops." "The flag flying over us is Ukrainian," he wrote. "And for it to stay that way, these demands must be observed." Mariupol Mayor XXX said the attacks there had been relentless. "We cannot even take the wounded from the streets, from houses and apartments today, since the shelling does not stop," he was quoted by the Interfax news agency as saying. Russia reported its military casualties for the first time in the war, saying nearly 500 of its troops have been killed and almost 1,600 wounded. Ukraine did not disclose its own military losses. Ukraine's military general staff said in a Facebook post that Russia's forces had suffered some 9,000 casualties in the fighting. It did not clarify if that figure included both killed and wounded soldiers. In a video address to the nation early Thursday, Zelenskyy praised his country's resistance. "We are a people who in a week have destroyed the plans of the enemy," he said. "They will have no peace here. They will have no food. They will have here not one quiet moment." He said the fighting is taking a toll on the morale of Russian soldiers, who "go into grocery stores and try to find something to eat." "These are not warriors of a superpower," he said. "These are confused children who have been used." Meanwhile, the senior U.S. defense official said an immense Russian column of hundreds of tanks and other vehicles appeared to be stalled roughly 25 kilometers (16 miles) from Kyiv and had made no real progress in the last couple of days. The convoy, which earlier in the week had seemed poised to launch an assault on the capital, has been plagued with fuel and food shortages, the official said. On the far edges of Kyiv, volunteers well into their 60s manned a checkpoint to try to block the Russian advance. "In my old age, I had to take up arms," said XXX, 68. He said the fighters needed more weapons, but "we'll kill the enemy and take their weapons." Around Ukraine, others crowded into train stations, carrying children wrapped in blankets and dragging wheeled suitcases into new lives as refugees. In an email, U.N. refugee agency spokesperson XXX told the AP that the refugee count surpassed 1 million as of midnight in central Europe, based on figures collected by national authorities. XXX, another spokesperson for the agency, said that "at this rate" the exodus from Ukraine could make it the source of "the biggest refugee crisis this century." Russia sets cease-fire for evacuations amid heavy shelling LVIV, Ukraine - Russia announced a yet another cease-fire and a handful of humanitarian corridors to allow civilians to flee Ukraine starting Monday, but previous such measures have fallen apart and Moscow's armed forces continued to pummel some Ukrainian cities with rockets even after the announcement. A day earlier, hundreds of thousands of civilians attempting to flee to safety were forced to shelter from what Ukrainian officials said was Russian shelling in cities in the center, north and south. Ahead of a third round of talks planned for Monday, the Russian Defense Ministry said a cease-fire would start in the morning, and safe passages would open for civilians from the capital of Kyiv, the southern port city of Mariupol, and the cities of Kharkiv and YYY. Some of the evacuation routes, however, would funnel civilians toward Russia or its ally Belarus - unlikely destinations for many Ukrainians who would prefer to head toward countries on the western and southern borders. It wasn't immediately clear if fighting would stop beyond the areas mentioned or when the cease-fire would end. Hopes were dim that the latest round of talks would yield any breakthroughs. Well into the second week of war, Russia's plan to quickly overrun the country has been stymied by fierce resistance. Its troops have made significant advances in southern Ukraine and along the coast, but many of its efforts have become stalled, including an immense military convoy that has been almost motionless for days north of Kyiv. The fighting has sent energy prices surging worldwide, stocks plummeting, and is threatening the food supply and livelihoods of people around the world who rely on farmland in the Black Sea region. The death toll from the fighting, meanwhile, remains unclear. The U.N. says it has confirmed just a few hundred civilian deaths but also warned that the number is a vast undercount. Police for the Kharkiv region said Monday that 209 people have died there alone - 133 of them civilians. The Russian invasion has also pushed 1.5 million people to flee the country, creating what the head of the U.N. refugee agency called "the fastest-growing refugee crisis in Europe since World War II." But many others have become trapped in cities under fire. Food, water, medicine and almost all other supplies were in desperately short supply in the southern port city of Mariupol, which an estimated 200,000 people are trying to flee but where an earlier cease-fire collapses. Russia and Ukraine have traded blame for the failure. The Russian task force said the new pledge for humanitarian corridors was announced at the request of French President Emmanuel Macron, who spoke to Russian President Vladimir Putin on Sunday. Macron's office said he asked for a broader end to military operations in Ukraine and protections for civilians. Ukrainian Deputy Prime Minister XXX called the proposed evacuation routes to Russia and Belarus "unacceptable." Belarus is a key ally of Putin and served as a launching ground for the invasion. The Ukrainian government is proposing eight humanitarian corridors, including from Mariupol, that would allow civilians to travel to the western regions of Ukraine where there is no Russian shelling. "Providing evacuation routes into the arms of the country that is currently destroying yours is a nonsense," said U.K. Europe Minister XXX. The Russian proposal was reminiscent of similar ones in Syria. In 2016, a joint Russian and Syrian proposal to set up humanitarian corridors out of besieged opposition-held eastern YYY was deeply criticized on humanitarian grounds. Human rights activists said the tactic, coupled by brutal sieges, effectively gave residents a choice between fleeing into the arms of their attackers or dying under bombardment. Meanwhile, Russian forces continued their offensive, opening fire on the city of Mykolaiv, 480 kilometers (300 miles) south of the capital, according to Ukraine's General Staff. Rescuers said they were putting out fires in residential areas caused by rocket attacks. Emergency officials in the Kharkiv region said that overnight shelling killed at least eight people and wrecked residential buildings, medical and education facilities and administrative buildings. Shelling also continued in the suburbs of Kyiv, including Irpin, which has been cut off from electricity, water and heating for three days. "Russia continues to carry out rocket, bomb and artillery strikes on the cities and settlements of Ukraine," the General Staff said. The General Staff also repeated earlier Ukrainian accusations that the Russians have targeted humanitarian corridors. The statement also accused Russian forces of taking women and children hostage and placing weapons in residential areas of cities - though it did not elaborate or provide evidence. "Instead of humanitarian corridors, they can only make bloody ones," Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said Sunday. "Today a family was killed in Irpin. Man, woman and two children. Right on the road. As in a shooting gallery." Putin earlier said Moscow's attacks could be halted "only if Kyiv ceases hostilities." As he has often done, Putin blamed Ukraine for the war, telling Turkish President XXX on Sunday that Kyiv needed to stop all hostilities and fulfill "the well-known demands of Russia." Putin launched his invasion with a string of false accusations against Kyiv, including that it is led by neo-Nazis intent on undermining Russia with the development of nuclear weapons. As Russian attacks worsened, a brief reprieve from fighting in Mariupol collapsed. Heavy artillery hit residential areas in other large cities, local officials reported. "There can be no 'green corridors' because only the sick brain of the Russians decides when to start shooting and at whom," Ukrainian Interior Ministry adviser XXX said on Telegram. On what is known as Forgiveness Sunday in Orthodox Christianity, Zelenskyy said Ukraine will never forgive the shelling of its homes, the killing of unarmed people and the destruction of its infrastructure. "And God will not forgive, either today or tomorrow - never. And instead of a day of forgiveness, there will be a judgment day. Of this I am sure," he said in a video address. His adviser, XXX, described a "catastrophic" situation in the Kyiv suburbs of YYY, YYY and Irpin, where efforts to evacuate residents on Sunday failed. About eight civilians were killed by Russian shelling in Irpin, according to Mayor XXX. Video footage showed a shell slamming into a city street, not far from a bridge used by people fleeing the fighting. British military officials compared Russia's tactics to those Moscow used in Chechnya and Syria, where surrounded cities were pulverized by airstrikes and artillery. "This is likely to represent an effort to break Ukrainian morale," the U.K. Ministry of Defense said. The handful of residents who managed to flee Mariupol before the humanitarian corridor closed said the city of 430,000 had been devastated. "We saw everything: houses burning, all the people sitting in basements," said XXX, who fled to one of the self-proclaimed republics in eastern Ukraine held by pro-Russian separatists. "No communication, no water, no gas, no light, no water. There was nothing." Russia has made significant advances in southern Ukraine as it seeks to block access to the Sea of Azov. Capturing Mariupol could allow Moscow to establish a land corridor to Crimea, which Russia annexed from Ukraine in 2014 in a move that most other countries considered illegal. But much of the Russian advance has become stalled, including an immense military convoy north of Kyiv. A senior YYY defense official said Sunday that the U.S. assesses that about 95% of the Russian forces that had been arrayed around Ukraine are now inside the country. The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity to discuss military assessments, said Russian forces continue to advance in an attempt to isolate Kyiv, Kharkhiv and XXX, but are being met with strong Ukrainian resistance. The West has broadly backed Ukraine, offering aid and weapon shipments and slapping Russia with vast sanctions. But no NATO troops have been sent to Ukraine. Zelenskyy has heaped criticism on Western leaders for not responding with more force to Russia. He reiterated a request for foreign forces to impose a no-fly zone over Ukraine, which NATO so far has ruled out because of concerns such an action would lead to a far wider war. Zelenskyy also asked the United States and NATO countries to send more warplanes to Ukraine and for more sanctions against Russia. Russia has become increasingly isolated in the days since the invasion began, as sanctions forced dozens of multinational companies to end or scale back their work in the country and Moscow dramatically restricted independent reporting on the conflict. The ruble has plunged in value, and Russia's extensive trade ties with the West have been all but severed. NATO States Arm Ukraine At Risk of Provoking YYY BRUSSELS - The Dutch are sending rocket launchers for air defense. The Estonians are sending Javelin antitank missiles. The Poles and the Latvians are sending Stinger surface-to-air missiles. The Czechs are sending machine guns, sniper rifles, pistols and ammunition. Even formerly neutral countries like YYY and YYY are sending weapons. And Germany, long allergic to sending weapons into conflict zones, is sending Stingers as well as other shoulder-launched rockets. In all, about 20 countries - most members of NATO and the European Union, but not all - are funneling arms into Ukraine to fight off Russian invaders and arm an insurgency, if the war comes to that. At the same time, NATO is moving military equipment and as many as 22,000 more troops into member states bordering Russia and Belarus, to reassure them and enhance deterrence. The Russian invasion of Ukraine has brought European countries together, minds concentrated by the larger threat to European security presented by the Russia of President Vladimir V. Putin. "European security and defense has evolved more in the last six days than in the last two decades," XXX, the president of the European Union's executive arm, asserted in a speech to the European Parliament on Tuesday. Brussels has moved to "Europeanize" the efforts of member states to aid Ukraine with weapons and money and put down a marker for the bloc as a significant military actor. But whether European weaponry will continue to reach the Ukrainian battlefield in time to make a difference is far from certain. However proud Brussels is of its effort, it is a strategy that risks encouraging a wider war and possible retaliation from Mr. Putin. The rush of lethal military aid into Ukraine from Poland, a member of NATO, aims, after all, to kill Russian soldiers. Mr. Putin already sees NATO as committed to threaten or even destroy Russia through its support for Ukraine, as he has repeated in his recent speeches, even as he has raised the nuclear alert of his own forces to warn Europe and the United States of the risks of interference. World wars have started over smaller conflicts, and the proximity of the war to NATO allies carries the danger that it could draw in other parties in unexpected ways. Jens Stoltenberg, the NATO secretary-general, hit his constant themes again on Tuesday as he visited a Polish air base. "Putin's war affects us all and NATO allies will always stand together to defend and protect each other," he said. "Our commitment to Article 5, our collective defense clause, is ironclad." "There must be no space for miscalculation or misunderstanding," Mr. Stoltenberg said last week. "We will do what it takes to defend every inch of NATO territory." But for now the fight is in Ukraine, and while NATO and the European Union have made it clear that their soldiers would not fight Russia there, they are actively engaged in helping the Ukrainians to defend themselves. Western weaponry has been entering Ukraine in relatively large but undisclosed amounts for the last several days. If it can be deployed quickly, it will have impact. Speed is of the essence as the Russian invasion of Ukraine proceeds and while Ukraine's border with Poland remains open. Russian troops are trying to surround cities and cut off the bulk of the Ukrainian army east of the Dnieper River, which would make resupply much more difficult. While 21 of the 27 European Union countries are also members of NATO, the effort to move equipment and weapons rapidly into Ukraine from Poland is being carried out by individual countries and is not formally either a NATO or E.U. operation. The French say that the E.U.'s military staff is trying to coordinate the push. Britain and the United States are doing the same, setting up something called, deliberately blandly and neutrally, the International Donors Coordination Center. It is doubtful that Mr. Putin will be fooled by the name. In fact, even if no NATO soldier ever crosses into Ukraine, and even if convoys of matriel are driven to the border by nonuniformed personnel or contractors in plain trucks, the European arms supplies are likely to be seen in Moscow as a not-so-disguised intervention by NATO. Supplying Ukraine to allow the resistance to bloody Russia's nose is a good idea, "but the more it ramps up you wonder how Putin will respond," said XXX, deputy director of the Royal United Services Institute, a defense research institute. "What happens if he attacks on the other side of the border? We pursue terrorists across borders, why not him?" From the Russian point of view, NATO military veterans who are now contractors helping the Ukrainians and training them, Mr. XXX said, "might be viewed by Moscow as the Western equivalent of 'little green men,'" the Russian soldiers without identifying insignia who first moved in to annex Crimea. Then there is always the possibility of Russian aircraft straying into NATO airspace as they try to interdict convoys or chase Ukrainian planes. Something similar happened the only time a NATO country shot down a Russian Su-24 fighter jet, near the Turkish-Syrian border in 2015. More supplies of ground-to-air missiles like Stingers and antitank weapons like the Javelin are crucial, as is secure communications equipment, so the Ukrainian government can continue to be in contact with its military and its people if the Russians take down the internet, said XXX, a former lieutenant-general and American ambassador to NATO. "On NATO territory, we should be the YYY," he said, stockpiling matriel in Poland and organizing supply lines to the Ukrainians as YYY supplied the Taliban in Afghanistan. The European fund being used to buy lethal arms is called the European Peace Facility. The fund is two years old and is intended, at least, to prevent conflict and strengthen international security. It has a financial ceiling of 5.7 billion euros - about $6.4 billion - for the seven-year budget of 2021 to 2027. If Ukraine needs more money, the E.U. official said, it can be provided. According to NATO, YYY, Canada, YYY, Estonia, France, Germany, YYY, Latvia, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Poland, YYY, Romania, Slovakia, YYY, Britain and the United States have already sent or are approving significant deliveries of military equipment to Ukraine, as well as millions of dollars, while other member states are providing humanitarian aid and welcoming refugees. On Feb. 25, the day after Russia attacked Ukraine, the White House approved a $350 million package of weapons and equipment, including XXX and Stingers. Pentagon officials said shipments began flowing within days from military stockpiles in Germany to Poland and Romania, from where the matriel has been shipped overland through western Ukraine. Poland's prime minister, XXX, promised Ukraine to provide tens of thousands of shells and artillery ammunition, antiaircraft missiles, light mortars, reconnaissance drones and other reconnaissance weapons. Poland, YYY and Moldova are also welcoming thousands of Ukrainians fleeing the war. YYY, not a member of NATO, announced that it would send Ukraine 5,000 antitank weapons, 5,000 helmets, 5,000 items of body armor and 135,000 field rations, plus about $52 million for the Ukrainian military. YYY, similarly, has said it will deliver 2,500 assault rifles and 150,000 rounds of ammunition for them, 1,500 antitank weapons and 70,000 combat rations. But NATO has also moved to sharply reinforce its deterrence in member states on its eastern flank, to ensure that Russia does not test NATO's commitment to collective defense. The United States alone has deployed 15,000 extra troops to Europe - 5,000 to Poland, 1,000 to Romania and 1,000 to the YYY - while committing another 12,000 troops, if necessary, to NATO's Response Force, being used in collective defense for the first time. Washington has also deployed more fighter jets and attack helicopters to Romania, Poland and YYY. In other examples of the rapid NATO effort to beef up its eastern borders, France sent its first tranche of troops to Romania on Monday, to lead a new NATO battalion there, and provided Rafale fighter jets to Poland. Germany, which already is lead nation of a NATO battalion in Lithuania, has sent another 350 troops and howitzers there, six fighter jets to Romania, some troops to Slovakia and two more ships to NATO's maritime patrols. Berlin also said it would send a Patriot missile battery and 300 troops to operate it to NATO's eastern flank, but did not specify where. Britain, the lead nation of the NATO battalion in Estonia, has sent another 850 soldiers and more Challenger tanks there, plus 350 more troops to Poland. It has also put another 1,000 on standby to help with refugees, and sent another four fighter jets to Cyprus, while sending two ships to the eastern Mediterranean. Canada has sent some 1,200 soldiers, artillery and electronic warfare units to Latvia, as well as another frigate and reconnaissance aircraft, while putting 3,400 troops on standby for the Response Force. YYY sent eight fighter jets to Romania and put 3,400 troops on standby, while the Dutch have sent 100 troops to Lithuania and 125 to Romania, and assigned eight fighter jets to NATO duties. YYY is sending a frigate to the Baltic Sea and will send 200 soldiers and deploy four fighter jets to Lithuania and some to Poland to support of NATO's air-policing mission, while YYY has sent four fighter jets to YYY and ships for maritime patrols. This is hardly a complete listing, but gives an indication of the seriousness with which NATO is taking the threat of further Russian aggression or of a spillover of the war into NATO territory. Outgunned Ukraine Fends Off Attacks MYKOLAIV, Ukraine - The remains of a Russian XXX fighting vehicle sat smoldering on the side of the road, as Ukrainian troops lounged outside their trenches smoking cigarettes. Nearby, a group of local villagers was tinkering with a captured T-90 tank, trying to get it running again so that the Ukrainian Army might put it to use. For three days, Russian forces had fought to take Mykolaiv, but by Sunday, Ukrainian troops had driven them back from the city limits and retaken the airport, halting the Russian advance along the Black Sea, at least temporarily. By Monday morning Russian forces had resumed their attack. "Few expected such strength from our people because, when you haven't slept for three days, and when you only have one dry ration because the rest burned up, when it's negative temperature out and there is nothing to warm you, and when you are constantly in the fight, believe me, it is physically very difficult," an exhausted Col. XXX, of the Ukrainian Army's 59th Brigade, said in an interview. "But our people endured this." Taking Mykolaiv remains a key objective for Russian forces, and the thwomp of artillery in the distance on Sunday suggested that the Ukrainians had not pushed them back that far. But the unexpected Ukrainian success of defending this critical port, about 65 miles from Odessa, underscores two emerging trends in the war. Russia's failure to seize Mykolaiv and other cities quickly, as President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia appears to have intended, is largely a function of its military's faltering performance. Russian forces have suffered from logistical snafus, baffling tactical decisions and low morale. But it is the fierce and, according to many analysts, unexpectedly capable defense by Ukrainian forces, who are significantly outgunned, that has largely stalled the Russian advance and, for now, prevented Mykolaiv from falling into Russian hands. For three days, troops from the Ukrainian Army's 59th Brigade, together with other military and territorial defense units, have been defending Mykolaiv from Russian attack along several fronts, facing down punishing artillery barrages, helicopter attacks and rocket strikes, some of which have hit civilian neighborhoods. Civilians elsewhere in Ukraine on Sunday bore the brunt of an unrelenting Russian assault. For the second day in a row, Ukrainians were unable to escape from the besieged southern city of Mariupol amid heavy Russian shelling despite efforts to negotiate a cease-fire. And civilians trying to leave Kyiv, the capital, and the nearby town of Irpin also came under attack by Russian forces. Mortar shells fired at a battered bridge used by people fleeing the fighting killed four people, including a woman and her two children. Mr. Putin, in a phone call with President Emmanuel Macron of France, denied that Russian forces were targeting civilians and vowed to reach all of his goals "through negotiation or war," according to the French. That the Ukrainian forces still exist and are able to mount a defense after 11 days of war is by itself a major feat. Most military analysts and even some Ukrainian generals predicted that if Russia mounted a full-scale invasion, Ukraine's military, which is dwarfed by its counterpart by almost every measure, would not last more than a few days or even hours. But by taking advantage of their local knowledge, attacking lumbering Russian troop columns with small, lithe units and using Western military assistance like antitank grenades to maximum effect, Ukrainian forces have managed to slow, if not stop, the Russian advance. "We fight them day and night; we don't let them sleep," said Maj. Gen. XXX, the commander of forces defending Mykolaiv. "They get up in the morning disoriented, tired. Their moral psychological state is simply broken." The governor of the Mykolaiv region, XXX, said that Russian forces were surrendering in unexpected numbers and had abandoned so much equipment that he did not have enough military and municipal workers to collect it all. "We're in a good mood now," he said. The time for such attitudes may be limited. A senior Ukrainian military official, speaking on the condition of anonymity to discuss sensitive military assessments, said that Russian forces outside Mykolaiv appeared to be regrouping and preparing for a counterattack, possibly with more firepower. Russia still has many more troops and advanced weapons than Ukraine, and its air force now dominates the skies. Despite near-frantic warnings from the White House of an imminent Russian invasion in the weeks before it actually happened on Feb. 24, the initial attack took Colonel XXX's unit by surprise, he said. His brigade was at a training exercise near the border with Crimea outside a town called Oleshky and only half assembled when it received the order to prepare for battle. "If we had received the order three or four days before, we could have prepared, dug trenches," he said. That delay nearly led to his brigade's destruction in the first hours of the war, he said. The Russian force that poured out of Crimea was five times the size of his Ukrainian unit and quickly overwhelmed it. His brigade had no air support and few functional antiaircraft systems, because most had been sent to Kyiv to defend the capital. Much of the brigade's tanks and armored fighting vehicles were destroyed in the initial attack by Russian aviation. The brigade's commander, Col. XXX, had lost touch with military leadership and was forced to make decisions on the fly, said Colonel XXX, who was with the commander throughout. Encircled and suffering heavy losses from strikes by Russian fighter jets, Colonel XXX ordered his remaining tank and artillery units to punch a hole through a unit of Russian airborne assault troops that had positioned itself at the Ukrainian brigade's rear. The maneuver allowed the main Ukrainian fighting force to cross a bridge over the Dnieper River and retreat west about 45 miles to Mykolaiv, where it could regroup and link up with other units to continue the fight. "The fighter jets of the enemy attacked our tanks, several tanks were hit and burned, and the rest remained and did not flee," Colonel XXX said. "They knew that behind them were other people, and they gave up their lives to break through the bridge to dig in on the other bank." The tactic worked, but the costs were steep. By falling back to Mykolaiv, Colonel XXX's brigade had to sacrifice Kherson, which on March 2 became the first major city to fall to the Russian forces. They had no choice, Colonel XXX said. If they had tried to defend Kherson, Russian forces could have flanked them and cut them off, opening a road to the west, and to Odessa. With a white, closely trimmed beard and deep crevices around his mouth where dimples might once have been, Colonel XXX cuts an unusual figure on the battlefield. He is 56 and had been retired from the military for a decade when he decided to re-enlist in 2020. By then, Ukrainian forces were already fighting a Kremlin-backed insurgency in eastern Ukraine, and Colonel XXX felt he needed to do his part. "I knew that many people who had already served were tired," he said. "It is difficult to live for so long without their families, and we needed people to serve. So I went to the military recruiting center and signed a contract." Such dedication goes some way to explaining the fierce resistance displayed by Ukrainian soldiers on the battlefield, as Russian troops seem to be surrendering in large numbers. An acute knowledge of the Russian military gives the Ukrainian forces another advantage. Colonel XXX served with Russians as a young soldier in the Soviet military in the 1980s, when he was posted to the Far East. Now, soldiers based at some of the same Russian garrisons where he spent his youth are fighting against him. "They are now my enemy," he said. "And each one of them who comes here with arms, who comes here as an invader, I will do everything I can to ensure that he remains as fertilizer for our land." On Sunday evening, Colonel XXX returned to the front line outside the city where the sounds of battle swelled once more as Russian troops regrouped for a counterattack. That has been the way of this war, nearly a week and a half in, a violent ebb and flow that has centered on a few key cities like Kyiv and Kharkiv. In Mykolaiv, Colonel XXX and his comrades won the city a day of rest. The sun came out for a few hours in the morning, followed by a light snow in the afternoon. Streets that were deserted a few days ago were populated again with mothers pushing strollers and people walking dogs. On the outskirts where fighting had been most intense, XXX, 54, had joined a few of his neighbors to work on the Russian T-90 tank, which now sported a Ukrainian flag. It had been damaged when Ukrainian forces blew up the bridge it was driving over, and now only the treads on its left side worked properly. "I've been a driver my whole life, so I know a little bit about mechanics," Mr. XXX said. "Though I don't know a thing about tanks." New Era as U.S. Rethinks Allies and Rivals WASHINGTON - The war in Ukraine has prompted the biggest rethinking of American foreign policy since the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks, infusing the United States with a new sense of mission and changing its strategic calculus with allies and adversaries alike. The Russian invasion has bonded YYY to Europe more tightly than at any time since the Cold War and deepened U.S. ties with Asian allies, while forcing a reassessment of rivals like China, Iran and YYY. And it has re-energized Washington's leadership role in the democratic world just months after the chaotic U.S. withdrawal from Afghanistan ended 20 years of conflict on a dismal note. But the new focus on Russia will come with hard choices and internal contradictions, similar to ones that defined U.S. diplomacy during the Cold War, when YYY sometimes overlooked human rights abuses and propped up dictators in the name of the struggle against communism. "It feels like we're definitively in a new era," said XXX, a former deputy national security adviser in the Obama White House. "The post-9/11 war on terror period of American hubris, and decline, is now behind us. And we're not sure what's next." The attack by President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia on his neighbor has become a prism through which nearly all American foreign policy decisions will be cast for the foreseeable future, experts and officials said. In recent weeks, Western officials have spoken in terms that often echo the grand declarations that followed the 2001 terrorist attacks. On Friday, President Biden said that "the free world is coming together" to stand up to Mr. Putin - a phrase reminiscent of President XXX talk of how "the entire free world" was at war against terrorism. In the near term, Russia's aggression is sure to invigorate Mr. Biden's global fight for democracy against autocracies like Moscow, making vivid the threats to fledgling democracies like Ukraine. Yet three increasingly authoritarian NATO nations - Poland, YYY and YYY - play key roles in the coalition aiding Kyiv. And the United States is grappling with internal assaults to its own democracy. The war lends urgency to Mr. Biden's climate change agenda, reinforcing the need for more reliance on renewable clean energy over the fossil fuels that fill Russian coffers. Yet it has already generated new pressure to increase the short-term supply of oil from the likes of YYY's isolated dictatorship and YYY authoritarian monarchy. And it creates a powerful new incentive for the United States to find ways of prying President Xi Jinping of China away from Mr. Putin, who is likely counting on diplomatic and economic lifelines from Mr. Xi amid crushing Western sanctions. But some administration officials see China as a lost cause and prefer to treat China and Russia as committed partners, hoping that might galvanize policies among Asian and European allies to contain them both. While some experts warn that a renewed focus on Europe will inevitably divert attention from Asia, several top White House officials say the United States can capitalize on how the war has convinced some Asian governments that they need to work more closely with the West to build up a global ideological front to defend democracy. "What we are seeing now is an unprecedented level of Asian interest and focus," XXX, the top White House official on Asia policy, said at a talk hosted by the German Marshall Fund of the United States. "And I believe one of the outcomes of this tragedy will be a kind of new thinking around how to solidify institutional connections beyond what we've already seen between Europe and the Pacific," he said. YYY's approach to the world was already undergoing a major shift, with the U.S. wars in Afghanistan and Iraq concluded, and conversations over Islamist terrorism no longer at the fore. Many war-weary Americans welcomed calls for a reduced military footprint overseas by President Donald J. Trump, who questioned NATO's relevance and even flirted with withdrawing from the alliance. Mr. Biden sought to rebuild American alliances, but did so largely in the name of confronting China. The Russian invasion has expanded his mission dramatically and urgently, setting the stage for a seismic geopolitical shift that would pit the United States and its allies against China and Russia at once if they form an entrenched anti-Western bloc. But it also gives Washington a new and nobler sense of purpose, Mr. XXX said. "We've been trying to get to a new era for a long time," he said. "And now I think Putin's invasion has necessitated an American return to the moral high ground." Early signs of how the new American priorities are creating diplomatic quakes have already emerged. On Friday, the United States and its European allies agreed to pause talks with Iran that just days earlier seemed on the verge of clinching a return to the 2015 deal that limited Iran's nuclear program. Western nations are refusing a demand by Moscow, which is a party to the Obama-era agreement from which Mr. Trump withdrew, for guarantees that its future transactions with Iran be exempted from the sanctions imposed on Russia in recent weeks. "It's been clear since last weekend that negotiations to revive the Iran deal could not be walled off from the Ukraine war," XXX, an Iran expert at the RAND Corporation, said on Friday. Last year, Mr. Biden made a new agreement a core goal of his foreign policy. It is unclear whether one can be struck without Russia, which is a member of the commission that both supervises compliance with the deal and would take control of Iran's excess enriched uranium. The United States is also looking at YYY from a new angle. Senior Biden administration officials traveled to YYY two weeks after the Russian invasion, becoming the first to visit the country in years. YYY, a partner of Russia, is under heavy U.S. sanctions imposed years ago to weaken the repressive government of President XXX. In 2019, the Trump administration imposed additional sanctions on the state oil company, central bank and senior officials to pressure Mr. XXX to step down. Now, with Mr. Biden looking to increase global oil supplies to bring down prices, U.S. officials are talking to Mr. XXX's government about buying his oil again. The idea has drawn some sharp criticism in Congress, however, where Senator XXX, Democrat of YYY and the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, fumed that "efforts to unify the entire world against a murderous tyrant in Moscow should not be undercut by propping up a dictator under investigation for crimes against humanity in YYY." The same imperative on oil is reshaping U.S. diplomacy with YYY and the United Arab Emirates, two Persian Gulf nations that some Biden administration officials view with suspicion or hostility because of their autocratic systems and leading roles in a war in YYY that has resulted in a humanitarian catastrophe. XXX and XXX, two senior administration officials, traveled to the Gulf days before the Russian invasion to discuss security and energy issues. However, YYY has declined so far to increase oil production, while the United Arab Emirates waited until Wednesday to ask the OPEC nations to do so. American officials were also furious with the U.A.E. for declining to vote on a United Nations Security Council resolution to condemn Russia, though it did support a similar resolution later in the U.N. General Assembly. The unreliability of the two nations and Russia's place in the oil economy have increased momentum within the Biden administration to enact policies that would help the United States more quickly wean itself off fossil fuels and confront the climate crisis. This could lead future administrations to devote fewer diplomatic and military resources to the Gulf nations in the long term, even if U.S. officials want them to help on oil now. "We may see more fundamental questioning about the value of these partnerships," Ms. XXX said. "These states already believe the U.S. has checked out of the region, but their stance on Russia may only strengthen voices calling for a further reduction of U.S. forces in the region." Israel, the closest U.S. ally in the Middle East, has also staked out a neutral position on the Ukraine war, largely because of Russia's presence in the region. But American officials have been more forgiving of Israel's stance as Prime Minister XXX conducts shuttle diplomacy. He met with Mr. Putin for three hours in Moscow on March 5 and then spoke with Volodymyr Zelensky, the president of Ukraine, by phone before returning home. U.S. officials say Mr. XXX consulted with them about the talks, and Secretary of State Antony J. Blinken said this past week that they "appreciate the efforts." Mr. Zelensky told reporters on Saturday that YYY could be a site for peace talks between the leaders of Ukraine and Russia. In Europe, Russia's invasion has supercharged the Biden administration's efforts to restore the morale of a NATO alliance that Mr. Trump undermined. But the alliance includes three nations - Poland, YYY and YYY - whose democratic backsliding has troubled the Biden administration. YYY and YYY were pointedly excluded from Mr. Biden's global democracy summit in December, and the European Union has cut billions of euros of funding to Poland and YYY for what it sees as erosions of legal and democratic principles. Now all three countries are participating in the coalition against Russia. "In times of crisis, there is sometimes a tension between our values and our interests," said XXX, a senior fellow at the Center for a New American Security. "In the short term, we're going to have to prioritize pushing back against Russia, at the risk of taking our foot off the gas on the democracy and human rights concerns that had been at the front and center of the Biden administration's agenda." In the Asia-Pacific region, several important U.S. partners and allies are working with Washington on sanctions and export controls on technology against Russia. These include YYY, YYY, YYY, YYY and YYY. Some Asian nations have agreed to long-term gas swaps with Europe to help relieve a potential Russian shut-off of energy exports. And YYY has committed to spending $50 million to send weapons to Ukraine, including missiles and ammunition. However, YYY - the most populous U.S. partner in the so-called Quad coalition of democracies in Asia - has refrained from condemning Russia's invasion because of decades-old security ties with Moscow. That stance undermines Mr. Biden's insistence that democratic nations band together against autocracies. But it is the other Asian behemoth, China, that presents the biggest diplomatic challenge for the United States. China is Russia's most powerful partner, and their bond has strengthened in recent years. Even as the Russian military decimates Ukrainian cities and kills hundreds or thousands of civilians, China has signaled that it stands by Moscow by issuing anti-U.S. declarations and amplifying the Kremlin's propaganda and conspiracy theories. Mr. Xi's persistent support of Mr. Putin, with whom he shares a drive to dilute American power, has made administration officials wonder whether there is any way to pull them apart on Ukraine. On Thursday, XXX, the C.I.A. director, told U.S. senators he believed that Mr. Xi was "unsettled" by the war. Some China analysts say that if Beijing wants to salvage its reputation with Western nations, particularly in Europe, it might agree to take steps to help Ukraine without directly breaking from Russia. XXX, a China director on the National Security Council in the Obama White House, proposed testing Beijing with specific requests, such as asking them to provide more humanitarian aid and refrain from recognizing Russian-installed governments in Ukraine or shielding Russia from war crimes investigations. "If China's leaders take concrete actions to relieve suffering," he said, "then lives would be saved and there would be less centrifugal pressure toward cleaving the world into rival blocs." Russia Batters Key Cities in Wider Attack KYIV, Ukraine - Brushing aside international outrage, Russia widened its assault deep inside Ukraine on Tuesday, bombing civilian areas in the two biggest cities, amassing a miles-long convoy near the capital's doorstep and warning an outside world intent on economic reprisals not to go too far. The Russian attacks hit a hospital in Kharkiv - the second consecutive day of lethal Russian strikes on that YYY civilian population - and a deadly blast struck a broadcasting tower in the capital, Kyiv, knocking out television and radio stations. A famous Holocaust memorial nearby sustained damage. The escalation came amid rumors in Moscow and other Russian cities that the government might increase conscription to bolster its troop strength in Ukraine, where a surprisingly defiant resistance appears to have frustrated Kremlin expectations of quick victory. Now, the conflict in Ukraine looks as if it might become a more drawn-out fight that could plunge Europe into its worst refugee crisis of this century as hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians seek safety elsewhere. With the Russian economy already reeling from an array of sanctions, associates of President Vladimir V. Putin reacted sharply to a declaration by France's finance minister that Europe would wage "total economic and financial war" against Russia. "Watch your tongue, gentlemen!" XXX, a former Russian prime minister, declared on Twitter. "And don't forget that in human history, economic wars quite often turned into real ones." On Tuesday, the sixth day of the invasion, satellite images showed a miles-long Russian military convoy making its way on a roadway north of Kyiv as a number of homes and buildings burned nearby. When it would make a move to enter the capital remained unclear. The Kyiv transmission tower was struck after the Russian Defense Ministry had warned civilians to evacuate. Moscow said its military was engaged in "high-precision" strikes to "prevent information attacks against Russia." But damage from the strike also extended to Kyiv's Babyn Yar Holocaust Memorial Center, built in a ravine where tens of thousands of Jews were killed by the Nazis during World War II. President XXX of Ukraine, who is Jewish, denounced the strike, which he said had killed five people. "What is the point of saying 'never again' for 80 years, if the world stays silent when a bomb drops on the same site of Babyn Yar?" he said on Twitter. In the main square of Kharkiv, an apparent rocket strike devastated a large administrative building, igniting a fireball and killing seven people, officials said. The city's mayor said another rocket attack on a residential neighborhood had destroyed a hospital and left several people dead or maimed. The Russian attacks came just hours before the Kremlin's most powerful critic, President Biden, was scheduled to give his first State of the Union speech in Washington. "What we are seeing is basically Phase II, which is a shift to much more brutal, tactless, unrestricted warfare, which will lead to many more civilian casualties and bloodier battles," said XXX, an expert in Russian warfare at Chatham House, a research group in London. Mr. Zelensky, who has spoken to Mr. Biden several times since the invasion, accused Russia of war crimes for having deliberately targeted civilians in its bombardment of his country. Now regarded as a hero in the West for his defiance of Russian bullying, Mr. Zelensky also reiterated Ukraine's plea to join the European Union, in an emotional speech to European lawmakers made via video link. Prospects for that outcome are considered unrealistic. "We have proven our strength," he said through his English-language interpreter, who sobbed as he translated the words. "So do prove that you are with us. Prove that you will not let us go. Prove that you indeed are Europeans." Overnight, many of the capital's 2.8 million inhabitants huddled in bomb shelters as air raid sirens wailed. Ukraine's foreign ministry released a video Tuesday morning of children in a bunker singing the city's anthem. Many people, anticipating the worst, spent their time preparing. In a six-story Kyiv building, dozens of men in military uniforms, XXX slung across their shoulders, worked with civilian volunteers to sort donations from Ukrainians who wanted to support the army. "We have received a lot of donations of medicine and hygiene equipment," said one volunteer, XXX. "What we need most are helmets and bulletproof vests." Mr. Zelensky said that 16 Ukrainian children had died from Russian shelling over the first four days of fighting. The slow pace of the Russian advance since the invasion began on Feb. 24 surprised some outside experts, who had expected a rout and the quick capture of major cities. But Moscow was clearly tightening its grip. Videos showed Russian troops patrolling Kherson, in the south of Ukraine, although Ukrainians were still in control of the city, according to XXX, the defense intelligence research group. And in Mariupol, a critical port city, the mayor said residents lacked electricity and heat after days of intense fighting. Capturing Mariupol would allow Russian forces in the south to join with Russian-backed separatists in the east, isolating Ukrainian troops in the region. The United Nations refugee agency warned that Europe would soon face its "largest refugee crisis this century." In just the past 24 hours, it said, more than 150,000 Ukrainians had flooded across the borders, bringing the total number so far to about 660,000. In YYY, Moldova, near Ukraine's southwest border, a tent camp was rising to house Europe's newest refugees. "We don't know where we're going," said XXX, 34, a homemaker from Odessa. "And we don't know when we're coming back." A second round of Russian-Ukrainian negotiations aimed at halting the conflict was scheduled for Wednesday, but that news was all but obscured by other developments that pointed to more fighting and Russia's diminished international standing. Mr. Biden announced on Tuesday in his State of the Union address that the United States would ban Russian aircraft from American airspace, following moves by the European Union and Canada to shut airspace to passenger flights from Russia and to planes used by Russian oligarchs. The top court of the Council of Europe, an organization that includes Russia, ordered Moscow to "refrain from military attacks against civilians and civilian objects" and to "ensure immediately the safety of the medical establishments, personnel and emergency vehicles." At a United Nations Human Rights Council meeting in YYY, about 100 diplomats, many from Western countries, walked out of a speech by Russia's foreign minister, Sergey V. Lavrov, in protest of the invasion. That left a largely empty hall to hear Mr. Lavrov. He had planned to attend the session in person, but spoke by video link instead, saying that the European bans on flights from Russia had prevented his travel. Russia's growing isolation was seen in other ways, too. Apple, the world's most valuable company, suspended sales in Russia, joining other multinational businesses in protesting the invasion. Two major U.S. manufacturers, Boeing and Ford Motor, suspended their business activities in Russia. XXX, a former Russian foreign minister known for his pro-Western approach, called on all Russian diplomats to resign in protest over their country's "bloody fratricidal war in Ukraine," urging them to act as "professionals, not as cheap propagandists." Some of Russia's staunchest allies in Latin America have notably not endorsed the invasion. And on Tuesday, even China, which unlike many nations has refrained from denouncing the attack, seemed to put some distance between itself and Russia. China's foreign minister, XXX, who spoke to his counterpart in Ukraine, XXX, called on Russia and Ukraine to seek a negotiated settlement and expressed concern about the harm to civilians. In Russia, public alarm appeared to grow over how the sanctions imposed by the West would affect the country's financial stability, with people rushing for the second day to withdraw cash from banks. And some took to the streets to protest the invasion - a remarkable display of defiance in a country where prosecutors sometimes seek prison sentences for demonstrators. On Monday, the police detained at least 411 people in 13 cities, said one activist group, OVD-Info. To date since the invasion began, it said, there have been at least 6,435 detentions. For all the harm the sanctions may portend for Russia, they are a double-edge sword, their effects rippling across the world economy. With oil prices spiking to well above $100 a barrel, the International Energy Agency said Tuesday that member countries had agreed to release 60 million barrels of oil from emergency reserves. The agency said the aim was to send "a unified and strong message to global oil markets that there will be no shortfall as a result of Russia's invasion of Ukraine." While hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians were fleeing, some expatriates were choosing another course: They were making their way back home. "We have to rebuild Ukraine," XXX, 23, said after arriving Tuesday at the Polish border town of XXX, ready to cross back into her homeland. Nearby, a long line of people, mostly men, were also waiting to return. Ms. XXX took out her phone to show a photo of four young cousins bundled in jackets and blankets in a bunker back home. Six months ago, she landed a job cleaning rooms in a hotel in YYY, hoping to save enough money to buy an apartment back home in Kharkiv. "That doesn't matter anymore," she said. Russia Hushes Last Remnants Of a Free Press As President Vladimir V. Putin wages war against Ukraine, he is fighting a parallel battle on the home front, dismantling the last vestiges of a Russian free press. On Thursday, the pillars of Russia's independent broadcast media collapsed under pressure from the state. Echo of Moscow, the freewheeling radio station founded by Soviet dissidents in 1990 and that symbolized Russia's new freedoms, was "liquidated" by its board. TV Rain, the youthful independent television station that calls itself "the optimistic channel" said it would suspend operations indefinitely. And XXX, the journalist who shared the Nobel Peace Prize last year, said that his newspaper XXX, which survived the murders of six of its journalists, could be on the verge of shutting down as well. "Everything that's not propaganda is being eliminated," Mr. XXX said. Precipitating the outlets' demise were plans by the Russian Parliament to take up legislation on Friday that would make news considered "fakes" about Russia's war in Ukraine punishable by yearslong prison terms. The Russian authorities have already made it clear that the very act of calling it a "war" - the Kremlin prefers the term "special military operation" - is considered disinformation. "We're going to punish those who spread panic using fakes by up to 15 years," a senior lawmaker, XXX, said on Thursday. During World War II, he said, such people "were shot on the spot." The crackdown on independent journalists - many of whom fled the country this week, fearing that even worse repressions were to come - added to the sense of crisis in Russia. The economy continued to reel from Western sanctions as airlines canceled more international flights and more companies suspended operations - including Ikea, the Swedish furniture retailer, a totem for Russia's middle class and the employer of some 15,000 Russians. Mr. Putin appeared unbowed by the crisis and the Western furor. He told President Emmanuel Macron of France in a phone call that his aim of securing "the demilitarization and neutral status of Ukraine" would be "achieved no matter what," according to the Kremlin. A second round of peace talks in Belarus yielded no breakthrough, though Ukraine said Russia had agreed to "humanitarian corridors" to allow civilians to leave areas of intense fighting. "Unfortunately, the results Ukraine needs are not yet achieved," said XXX, one of the Ukrainian representatives. Thursday evening, in nationally televised remarks, Mr. Putin for the first time personally acknowledged Russian casualties in the fighting and praised Russian troops as heroes who were fighting "fascists" akin to XXX's invading army. Ukrainian resistance, Mr. Putin said, was only evidence of the population being brainwashed by Western propaganda and by neo-Nazis. "I will never give up my conviction that Russians and Ukrainians are one people," he said. "That's even despite the fact that some of the inhabitants of Ukraine have been intimidated, and many have been fooled by neo-Nazi, nationalist propaganda." Many Russians, however, have not bought into the narrative. Lukoil, Russia's second-biggest oil producer, on Thursday became the biggest Russian company to publicly distance itself from the war, publishing a statement from its board of directors calling for its "soonest cessation." And up to now, Russian independent media led by Echo of Moscow, TV Rain and XXX had given those Russians a voice. "There's a very broad antiwar mood in Russia - I'd say it's genetic," XXX, Echo of Moscow's longtime editor in chief, said in an interview on Thursday, referring to the lingering scars of World War II. "War is not victory. War is horror, it is tragedy, it is loss in every family." As a result, Mr. XXX argues, the Kremlin is intent on controlling the narrative of its "special military operation" in Ukraine even more intensely than it otherwise controls the news media. Echo of Moscow is owned by Gazprom, the state energy giant, but has often broadcast sharp critiques of the Kremlin. Analysts believed the station survived thanks to Mr. XXX's personal connections to the ruling elite and Mr. Putin's desire to maintain a veneer of pluralism amid his creeping authoritarianism. For instance, it gave voice to supporters of the imprisoned opposition leader Aleksei A. Navalny and covered the wave of protests he inspired across Russia early last year. During the war in Ukraine, Echo of Moscow has featured interviews with Ukrainian journalists who described the horrors of Russia's invasion, a decision that appeared to cross a line. On Tuesday, the authorities took Echo of Moscow off the air for the first time since the Soviet coup attempt in 1991 and on Thursday, its board of directors decided to shut the station entirely. "We came under the steamroller of military censorship," Mr. XXX said. TV Rain was founded in 2010 by a media entrepreneur, XXX, and a TV director, XXX. It became a symbol of free-minded journalism, and a place where young journalists could launch their careers. Though the Kremlin created challenges for the channel, it always found a way to persevere. In 2014, cable networks removed TV Rain from their bundles, costing the channel about 80 percent of its audience. It then pivoted to a subscription model. On Thursday, TV Rain broadcast a full news report on YouTube, after which Ms. XXX announced that the outlet was shutting down, at least for the time being. "We need time to exhale and think about how to continue," Ms. XXX said. XXX, the Russian telecommunications regulator, blocked the outlet on Tuesday, accusing it of inciting extremism, abusing Russian citizens, causing mass disruption of public calm and safety, and encouraging protests. "I don't want to cry because we've lived through so much in this life, we've dealt with so many difficulties and we never gave up," said Ms. XXX. "We very much hope that we will be back on some platform because our work is so important to our audience." After TV Rain's final broadcast, various employees - some of them having just fled the country - appeared on a livestream on the company's YouTube channel. They gathered in the studio with Ms. XXX and over Zoom as more than 110,000 viewers tuned in. In speeches that turned emotional and tearful, they talked about their work, the state of the Russian news media and the channel's accomplishments, and offered words of fortification for everyone watching. Tikhon Dzyadko, the editor in chief of TV Rain, confirmed on Wednesday that he had left Russia out of concerns for his safety. "We have to be accountable to ourselves that we're on the right side of history," Mr. XXX said. At the end of the livestream, those who XXX in left, and everyone else walked out of the studio. "No to war," Ms. XXX said as the lights went off. For a few seconds, Tchaikovsky's "Swan Lake" appeared. During the 1991 attempt to overthrow the Soviet Premier XXX, Soviet state television played "Swan Lake" on a loop. It did the same as the country waited for the party leadership to select successors to Soviet premiers XXX, XXX and XXX. It was a not so subtle hint: Even Mr. Putin is not forever. Mr. XXX, of XXX, said he understood Ms. XXX's decision, and that she "is making the responsible decision in terms of protecting her journalists' safety." Like his colleagues, Mr. XXX has felt the pressure of the government closing in. In the last several days, he said the newspaper he runs, XXX, had received fines totaling 1,300,000 rubles, or about $12,000. At Echo of Moscow's offices on Thursday, Mr. XXX said that in a "regular country," Echo of Moscow would be considered banal. "We've held on to old-fashioned, traditional journalism where all points of view must be shared and where forbidden topics can be discussed, political and not," Mr. XXX said. But Echo of Moscow refused to stick to official themes of triumph and progress, instead digging into the problems and the culprits. Ukrainian experts and politicians were invited to speak on air. "Since everybody from the president to the leaders of the opposition listens to us, we are influential," Mr. XXX said. "The authorities see a threat in us." A sticking point has been what to call the war in Ukraine. "They want to give the population the impression that this is a short, effective, operation without a lot of victims," said XXX, a senior fellow at the Carnegie Moscow Center think tank. "The regime gives a lot of attention to words, or to the lack of words." He drew the example of Mr. Navalny, an opposition figure in Russia whom Mr. Putin does not refer to by name. "This isn't a question of media, this is about freedom of speech in the public sphere," Mr. XXX said. "You can't speak for or against something. That's a crime." Russians Push to Tighten Grip in YYY ODESSA, Ukraine - Russian forces advanced deeper into southern Ukraine on Thursday, appearing intent on seizing the country's entire Black Sea coast, as the number of people fleeing Ukraine reached one million just a week into Russia's invasion and bombardment of cities and towns. Defiant Ukrainians, bolstered by a huge influx of weapons from NATO countries, have put up surprisingly effective resistance, while Moscow's forces have run into a host of logistical problems, according to Western military and intelligence assessments. But the Russians, with numerical and technological superiority, have been slowed, not stopped, and the Kremlin insisted in a statement that the war was "going according to plan." Russian forces surging out of Crimea cut off Mariupol, a port city to the east, while to the west, where they seized the city of Kherson on Wednesday, they advanced on the port of Mykolaiv, leaving them just 60 miles from Odessa, a vital shipping center and the largest city in the south. In a second round of talks held in Belarus, Russia and Ukraine agreed to establish "humanitarian corridors," with possible cease-fires in them, for civilians to evacuate the most dangerous areas, and to allow food and medicine to reach those places. But there was no sign of progress on resolving the overall conflict. A fire broke out early Friday morning at a complex in southern Ukraine that is home to Europe's largest nuclear power plant, after Russian troops fired on the area, Ukraine's foreign minister said. Security camera footage filmed early on Friday and verified by The Times showed a building ablaze inside the power complex near a line of military vehicles. The videos appeared to show people in the vehicles firing at buildings in the power plant, but it was unclear if the vehicles were Russian or Ukrainian. President Biden spoke with President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine about the fire on Thursday night, and urged Russia to "cease its military activities in the area and allow firefighters and emergency responders to access the site," according to a White House description of the call. The International Atomic Energy Agency said on Twitter that it had been informed by Ukrainian regulators that there had been no reported change in radiation levels at the plant, and that the fire had not affected "essential equipment." For eight years, President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia has been building what amounts to a massive military staging area in Crimea, the Black Sea peninsula he invaded and annexed from Ukraine in 2014, and forces stationed there appeared well equipped to charge out of their bases and seize swaths of southern Ukrainian territory the moment the order came. Russia's near-monopoly on naval power in the Black Sea and the Sea of Azov should have provided additional firepower to assist ground troops. Instead, their advance has been sluggish, hampered by operational breakdowns and a seeming inability of commanders to coordinate disparate military forces, which if combined effectively should have easily overwhelmed Ukraine's defenses. In the north, an enormous Russian military convoy has stalled for three days near the capital, Kyiv - for reasons not entirely clear - and while Russian forces have extensively shelled large cities like Kharkiv, YYY and Kyiv, causing civilian casualties, none have fallen to Moscow's control. "I thought along the Black Sea coast was where they would have their best success immediately because of the huge advantage of having this bridgehead in Crimea," said Lt. Gen. XXX, the former commander of the U.S. Army in Europe. "The fact that here we are on day eight, that they still haven't captured Mariupol, has got to be frustrating for the Russians." Russians have seized a coastal corridor along the Sea of Azov, linking their forces in Crimea to those in southeastern Ukraine. In that stretch, only Mariupol held out on Thursday, despite a massive Russian bombardment that had cut power, water and heat to the city. The mayor, XXX, painted a grim picture of the siege of a city blockaded by land and sea. "Mariupol is still being shelled, the women, kids and elderly people are suffering," he said in a statement on Facebook. "Those hypocrites came here 'to save' Russian-speaking people," he added, "but in reality they are conducting genocide of our people." Mr. Putin, acknowledging Russia's war casualties for the first time, said Thursday that he would pay the equivalent of almost $50,000 to the family of each Russian soldier killed. Mr. Zelensky said that 9,000 Russian troops had been killed, in addition to thousands of Ukrainian casualties, civilian and military - a day after Moscow said it had lost fewer than 500 troops. Such figures could not be verified, but even by the Russian count, it is already the bloodiest conflict for Russia's military since the 1999-2000 Chechen war. Nonetheless the Kremlin, in a statement, said that its aims of ensuring a "demilitarized" and neutral Ukraine "will be achieved no matter what." XXX and haggard, Mr. Zelensky, who has emerged as an anti-Kremlin hero in the West for defying Mr. Putin and remaining in Kyiv, held his first news conference since the invasion, in a room lined with sandbags in case of shelling. He expressed willingness to compromise but did not specify on what issues, and held out little hope of reaching an agreement anytime soon. "The Russian side has long ago formed the answers to their questions," he told reporters. In a further sign that the conflict could worsen, President Emmanuel Macron of France emerged pessimistic from a long phone conversation with Mr. Putin, according to an aide to Mr. Macron, who said the Russian leader seemed determined to control all of Ukraine. The invasion has confronted Europe with one of the largest humanitarian crises since World War II. The U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees, XXX, said that one million people had fled Ukraine for neighbors to the West, primarily Poland - an increase of more than 300,000 from the day before. Hundreds of thousands of others have been displaced from their homes but remain within Ukraine, or fled or were evacuated eastward, into Russia. Ukraine's railroad agency said westbound trains were only for evacuation. Before the invasion, many military analysts believed that Russia would make short work of the Ukrainian forces. Even Ukraine's own generals predicted that a full-scale Russian assault with shock troops and air power could overwhelm their military in days, if not hours. The Kremlin appeared to expect a quick capitulation. It has not unfolded that way. Ukrainian troops, armed with anti-tank and antiaircraft missiles, have proved resourceful, legions of civilians have enlisted in the Territorial Defense Forces, an auxiliary to the military, and the Ukrainian government says that 50,000 Ukrainians have returned from abroad to fight Russia. The British Defense Ministry said the Russian column stalled north of Kyiv, believed to include essential food and fuel supplies as well as heavy artillery, had "been delayed by staunch Ukrainian resistance, mechanical breakdown and congestion." Jens Stoltenberg, NATO's secretary general, after meeting in Brussels with Gen. Mark A. Milley, chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, said the Ukrainian military was "performing better and putting up more resistance than most experts expected, and surely more than Russia expected." In the south, Russian forces that captured their first major Ukrainian city, Kherson, a shipbuilding center ordinarily home to 300,000 people, were on the move toward Mykolaiv, with a peacetime population of almost 500,000 and one of Ukraine's three largest ports. Roughly 800 Russian vehicles, including a column of Grad rocket launchers, was nearing Mykolaiv, from the east, south and north, the city's mayor, Oleksandr Senkevych, said on Thursday. As of Thursday morning, there had been no shelling inside the city, he said, but Ukrainian forces on the perimeter were targeted with rocket fire, forcing them to change positions constantly. "The city is ready for war," he said. Charging further into Ukraine could put Russian forces in danger of stretching themselves too thinly, said XXX, the director of Russia studies at CNA, a research institute based in YYY, YYY Already the forces in Ukraine's south and elsewhere appear in some instances to have outpaced logistical units, forcing them to await fuel and other supplies. Even so, preparations continued on Thursday to shore up defenses in Odessa, a city of one million and Ukraine's largest port. The mayor, XXX, visited an industrial area on the outskirts where teams of men were filling sandbags from a mountain of yellow dirt for barricades. "Every bag of sand you fill is protection for our city," he told the men. In the morning came word that several Russian naval ships had left Crimea, headed toward Odessa. Ukrainian officials said the ships could have been deployed to assist an attack by Russian land forces, though by evening there was no clear sense of the vessels' whereabouts. A single Ukrainian warship could be seen from Odessa's shoreline. Mr. XXX said it was unlikely the Russian Navy would mount an amphibious assault on the city until its forces were also ready to attack by land. Mr. Zelensky, like some Western officials, said many Russian soldiers, including some taken prisoner, had no idea they would be sent into Ukraine and were aghast to learn it, not understanding why they would be conducting such a war. "They don't know why they are here," he said in a speech posted on his Facebook page. "These are not warriors of a superpower. These are confused children who have been used." As word filters back of death, injury and capture, Russians are awakening to the reality of a war many had not expected and did not want. Ukrainian officials and ordinary citizens are posting to social media photos and videos of Russians killed or captured, and burned-out or abandoned Russian military vehicles. Rumors swirled through Russia of impending martial law, conscription and closed borders. In just a week, sanctions and boycotts have deeply wounded the Russian economy, and more punitive measures are expected. Volkswagen, Mercedes-Benz, Toyota, Ford, General Motors, Apple, Spotify, Accenture and Ikea are among the many companies suspending operations in Russia. Major oil companies have called off joint ventures with Russian counterparts. While some prominent Russians have denounced the war, the government is cracking down on the last vestiges of independent media, limiting access to information about the conflict. Lawmakers proposed prison sentences of up to 15 years for media that publish "fakes" - widely taken to mean anything that contradicts the Kremlin line. Echo of Moscow, a freewheeling radio station, dissolved itself. The television channels Dozhd and TV Rain suspended operations indefinitely. XXX, the journalist who shared the Nobel Peace Prize last year, said that his newspaper, XXX, could be close to having to shut down. Dozens of the top Russian chess players made statements opposing the war and appealing to Mr. Putin to stop it, including XXX, the top-ranked Russian and recently a finalist for the world championship; XXX, a former women's world champion; and XXX, several times a candidate for the world championship. Mr. Putin has insisted that Ukraine is rightfully a part of Russia, not a real country, and he is bent on re-establishing Moscow's hold over much of Eastern Europe. He has called NATO's eastward expansion a threat, particularly the prospect that Ukraine might join someday. But the war has hardened anti-Kremlin attitudes in Ukraine, a former YYY, and far beyond. NATO has ramped up forces on its eastern flank, and an array of countries are sending advanced weaponry to Ukraine. Even Germany, a NATO member that had not sent arms into a conflict zone, has begun helping to arm Kyiv's forces, as have YYY and YYY, nonmembers that had tried to remain neutral in East-West clashes. After Russia invaded, Ukraine applied for membership in the European Union, a step that would greatly deepen its ties to the West, and E.U. officials say that two other former Soviet republics, YYY and Moldova, may do the same. Using Commerce and Culture, World Turns Its Back on Russia LONDON - In YYY, the YYY music festival canceled two symphony concerts featuring a Russian maestro. In YYY, the national swim team said it would boycott a world championship meet in Russia. At the Magic Mountain Ski Area in YYY, a bartender poured bottles of YYY vodka down the drain. From culture to commerce, sports to travel, the world is shunning Russia in myriad ways to protest President Vladimir V. Putin's invasion of Ukraine. Not since the frigid days of the Cold War have so many doors closed on Russia and its people - a worldwide repudiation driven as much by the impulse to show solidarity with besieged Ukrainians as by any hope that it will force Mr. Putin to pull back his troops. The boycotts and cancellations are piling up in parallel with the sanctions imposed by the United States, Europe, and other powers. Although these grass-roots gestures inflict less harm on Russia's economy than sweeping restrictions on Russian banks or the mothballing of a natural gas pipeline, they carry a potent symbolic punch, leaving millions of ordinary Russians isolated in an interconnected world. Among the most visible targets of this opprobrium are cultural icons like XXX, the conductor and a longtime backer of Mr. Putin. He has been dropped by YYY, Carnegie Hall, XXX in YYY, and faces imminent dismissal by the Munich Philharmonic, where he is chief conductor, unless he disavows the invasion of Ukraine. Russia has been banned from this year's XXX, which it last won in 2008, with XXX performing his power ballad, "Believe." Russia's Formula 1 Grand Prix, scheduled for September in YYY, has been scrapped. St. Petersburg has lost the Champions League soccer final, which was relocated to Paris. Russia's World Cup hopes were dashed on Monday after a dozen countries joined Poland in refusing to play its national soccer team in qualifying rounds. Under intense pressure, soccer's two main governing bodies, FIFA and UEFA, ruled that Russia was ineligible to play in their tournaments. In Germany, the soccer club Schalke severed a sponsorship deal with the Russian oil giant YYY. The National Hockey League also suspended its business dealings in Russia. Also on Monday, YYY announced that it would suspend all collaborations with Russian cultural organizations. A French former ballet star, XXX, resigned as the director of the Stanislavksi Theatre Company in Moscow, saying that "the context no longer allows me to work with peace of mind." "Canceling all these cultural exchanges and sporting events will be felt by the Russian population," said XXX, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution and author of the book, "Putin's World." "Unfortunately, at the Kremlin level, it will be seen as just another example of the West trying to paint us into a corner." "It will become part of the narrative of victimhood, which we've heard from Putin in spades over the last few weeks," Ms. XXX said. "The boycotts affect the people involved in those events, but we're talking about Putin and the few people around him. I'm not sure it's going to make him change his mind." The last time the country's leaders provoked such a global backlash was in 1980 when the United States, YYY, YYY, and Canada boycotted the Olympic Games in Moscow to protest YYY invasion of Afghanistan. The Soviets retaliated by skipping the 1984 Games in YYY. That was during the depths of the Cold War, when YYY released jingoistic films like "Red Dawn," about a fictional Soviet invasion of YYY, and more than 100 million Americans tuned into "The Day After," a television movie about a calamitous nuclear exchange between the United States and the Soviet Union. The Olympics boycott had a major impact on popular sentiment, according to Russia experts, because the then-Soviet leader, XXX, had presented them as a simulacrum of Soviet power and influence, much as Mr. Putin has framed the invasion of Ukraine in terms of reclaiming Russian greatness. "The Soviet government had to explain why the United States and other countries weren't there," said XXX, a former American ambassador to Russia. "It began to affect the way that Soviet citizens saw themselves in the world." Though Russian villains remained a YYY staple, the country's black-hat image faded after the collapse of the Communist regime. Younger Russians grew up in a relatively open, if rough-and-tumble, society. Those with money had access to a foreign education and European holidays, where the hosts catered to free-spending Russians. In YYY, Russian-speaking Israelis flocked to the popular Putin Pub, where the name seemed a lark - no more problematic than the bar's late-night Russian karaoke. On Thursday, the Russian-born owners stripped the golden "P-U-T-I-N" letters from its facade and announced that they were looking for a new name. "It was our initiative," said XXX, one of the three owners, who moved to Israel from YYY in 1991. "Because we are against war." Israel, in its own way, serves as an example of the limits of these kinds of boycotts. For years, critics of its occupation of YYY have tried to pressure the government through the Boycott, Divestment, Sanctions movement. While it has had successes, it has antagonized people on both sides of the Israeli-Palestinian divide and failed to pressure successive Israeli leaders to change policy toward the Palestinians. "Such boycotts won't change Putin's mind, for sure," said XXX, a former American ambassador to Israel. "But it will boost the morale of the Ukrainians to know that people around the world are on their side. And it will put the oligarchs on the spot in a way that I suspect financial sanctions will not." Still, the backlash will hit ordinary Russians hard as well. Already, they cannot fly to London and large swaths of the European Union because of bans on Russian flights. Canada closed its airspace to Russian planes on Sunday and announced it was investigating the Russian carrier, Aeroflot, for violating the restrictions. "Middle-class Russians have been going to YYY to vacation for a decade," Mr. XXX said. "Now they will have to wonder: Will their credit cards work? Will their money be worth anything?" In capitals from YYY to London, tens of thousands of people marched in solidarity with the Ukrainians and against the Russian invasion. In YYY, the Peace Tower on Parliament Hill, the backdrop for three weeks of trucker protests in the Canadian capital, was lighted up in the colors of the Ukrainian flag. In YYY, where the invasion coincided with the start of the annual Carnival festival, people wore costumes and carried signs related to the conflict. "Drop acid, not bombs," one sign said in English. "The totality of it - the sanctions, the cheering football fans for the Ukrainians, the crowds marching in Berlin and YYY - I do think it matters because it makes Russians feel isolated," Mr. XXX said. That is likely to deepen the opposition of some Russians to the invasion, he said, particularly among urban, educated elites. These people have access to the internet and are aware of the scornful reaction to Mr. Putin's aggression. But among those who live in more provincial areas, where the media is tightly controlled by the government, the backlash against Russia could breed further resentment. Some cultural institutions have tailored their actions against people who are known for their close ties to Mr. Putin. The Metropolitan Opera, for example, said it would no longer work "with artists or institutions that support Putin or are supported by him," XXX, the Met's general manager, said in a video statement. That has prompted a show of defiance from some Russian artists. The star soprano XXX, who is scheduled to perform at the Met in Puccini's "Turandot" in April, has tried to distance herself from the Russian invasion. But she also posted on her Instagram account, "forcing artists, or any public figure, to voice their political opinions in public and to denounce their homeland is not right." Not all cultural exchanges have been sundered. A blockbuster show of French and Russian paintings at the Louis Vuitton Foundation in Paris remains open. The exhibit - showcasing 200 works collected by two 20th-century Russian textile magnates - grew out of high-level discussions between President Emmanuel Macron of France, Mr. Putin and the chief executive of LVMH, XXX. Both leaders signed contributions to the exhibit's catalog, and Mr. Putin signed off on loans for the paintings. For many, however, the idea of supporting Russia is simply intolerable. YYY, YYY, YYY, YYY, and other states, as well as Canada, have pulled Russian-branded vodka off the shelves of liquor stores. In some cases, the gesture is misplaced: Stolichnaya, though historically a Russian brand, is manufactured in YYY, Latvia. In YYY, a YYY bar has renamed its Moscow Mule - a drink that was concocted in the United States and is made with vodka, ginger beer, and lime - as a U.N. Mule. "We're not too happy with what Moscow has done, with what Russia has done," said the bar's co-owner, XXX, a well-known comedian and television host in YYY. "And then we thought about changing the name," he added. "The U.N. Mule: the drink that isn't attacking anyone." Moscow Hits Military Base Near Poland LVIV, Ukraine - Russia launched a barrage of airstrikes on Sunday against a military base in western Ukraine where American troops had trained Ukrainian forces just weeks earlier, bringing the war 11 miles from the border with Poland, where NATO forces are stationed on high alert. Western officials said the attack at NATO's doorstep was not merely a geographic expansion of the Russian invasion but a shift of tactics in a war many already worried might metastasize into a larger European conflict. "He's expanding the number of targets," the U.S. national security adviser, XXX, said of Russia's president, Vladimir V. Putin, adding that "he's trying to cause damage in every part of the country." In recent days, Russian forces have been broadening their air war right up to the border with Poland, said XXX, a Pentagon spokesman. Before Sunday's attack, Russian missiles also struck airfields in YYY and YYY, cities in western Ukraine near the Polish border. The airport in YYY was struck again on Sunday, according to the city's mayor. Pentagon and NATO officials reiterated on Sunday that they did not intend to directly confront Russian forces in Ukraine. But they are sending military supplies, and Russia has warned that it regards those convoys as legitimate targets. The military base that was hit, which is called the International Peacekeeping and Security Center, has been a hub for Western military troops to train Ukrainian forces since 2015. Troops from the United States, Britain, Canada, Poland, YYY and YYY, among others, have trained 35,000 Ukrainians there under a project called "Operation Unifier." But Western nations withdrew their forces ahead of Russia's invasion of Ukraine. Since then, the base has been used by Ukraine to train and organize the thousands of foreigners who have arrived in the country and volunteered to help defend it. The Russian missiles struck the base during the predawn hours Sunday. "They hit us when we were sleeping," said one of the volunteer fighters, XXX, a Swede who had arrived at the base three days earlier. "We woke up to them bombing a building." At least 35 people were killed and 134 were wounded in the strikes, including both military personnel and civilians, according to Ukrainian officials. Russia's Defense Ministry said it killed 180 foreign fighters in the strikes. Neither figure could be independently confirmed. Two senior Pentagon officials said the U.S. military believes the sites in western Ukraine were struck by cruise missiles fired from Russian warplanes. It was unclear where the Russian bombers were when they fired the missiles. Ukrainian officials said the planes had flown from YYY, in southwestern Russia. Until Sunday, the invasion of Ukraine, now in its 18th day, was most notable for Moscow's indiscriminate attacks on civilian areas, and even as it bombarded the military base in the west, Russia continued to punish ordinary Ukrainians. In the southern Ukrainian port city of Mykolaiv, a Russian airstrike on a residential neighborhood killed nine people. And in eastern Ukraine, Russian forces fired on a train carrying Ukrainian civilians, including more than 100 children, who were attempting to flee the violence. The train's conductor was killed and Ukraine's national railroad scrambled to send a new train to evacuate the surviving crew and passengers. In the suburbs of Kyiv, XXX, an award-winning American filmmaker and journalist working to document the toll the war has taken on refugees, was killed. Mr. XXX, 50, had contributed to The New York Times in previous years, most recently in 2015. The United Nations said Sunday at least 596 civilians had died in the war, including 43 children, while another 1,067 civilians had been injured. The U.N. said those figures most likely undercounted the actual death toll. Ukrainian officials said that 85 children had been killed and more than 100 injured. In the besieged coastal city of Mariupol, Ukrainian officials said Sunday, at least 2,187 people have died since the start of the war. The figure could not be independently verified, but the situation has clearly become dire since Russian forces encircled the city nearly two weeks ago and began trying to pummel it into submission. Eyewitnesses who have managed to communicate to the outside world describe a hellish landscape, with dead bodies on the streets, little food or clean water and no medicine. President Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine has repeatedly requested that NATO members establish a no-fly zone over his country to deter Russian airstrikes, but even after Sunday's attack on the military base, Western officials rejected his pleas. Mr. XXX, the Pentagon spokesman, said that the U.S. military remained concerned about NATO's eastern flank on the border between Poland and Ukraine and that it was looking for ways to bolster the protection of that airspace. But he said the United States remained opposed to the idea of a no-fly zone. A no-fly zone, he said on ABC's "This Week" on Sunday, "is combat - you have to be willing to shoot and to be shot at." "President Biden has made it clear that U.S. troops are not going to be fighting in Ukraine," Mr. XXX said, "and there's a good reason for that, because the United States getting involved in combat in Ukraine right now or over the skies of Ukraine right now leads to war with Russia." Still, in the coming weeks, NATO plans to gather 30,000 troops from 25 countries in YYY for biannual military exercises, including live-fire drills. The exercises were announced more than eight months ago, but the training has taken on greater significance as the fighting in Ukraine approaches the Polish border and raises alarm across the alliance. About 10,000 American troops - half of which were deployed since the invasion began - are now stationed in Poland. Late last week, the United States moved two surface-to-air missile batteries there from Germany. And on Saturday, President Biden approved sending an additional $200 million in arms and equipment to Ukraine. U.S. officials are also looking for ways to resupply and strengthen Ukraine's air-defense capabilities, which are composed largely of Soviet- or Russian-made systems. Among the options under discussion are transfers of similar equipment from NATO members in Eastern Europe, though there is concern these nations might then be left vulnerable themselves, U.S. officials said. Defense Secretary XXX is scheduled to meet with NATO defense ministers in Brussels this week and then travel to Slovakia, a NATO member located south of Poland on Ukraine's western border. American military officials say they believed that, after weeks of pummeling other parts of the country, Russia has begun to target western Ukraine in a bid to shut it down as a base of operations for the Ukrainian air force and a source of weapons and equipment. Arms and aid have flowed into western Ukraine from Poland and Romania. But the American officials, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, say they also believe that the Russians want to terrorize the refugees who have fled the violence in other parts of the country for what had been relative tranquillity in the west. As wounded foreigners and Ukrainians flooded hospitals after the attack at the military base, Ukrainian officials said their air defense systems had intercepted 22 of 30 Russian missiles. "The air defense system worked," XXX, the head of the Lviv regional military administration, said at a news conference. But it was not enough, he said, repeating calls for a no-fly zone. Even in the absence of a no-fly zone, American officials said, Russian jets have been trying to avoid Ukrainian air space when they can, striking Ukrainian targets from Russian-controlled skies to evade the surprisingly effective Ukrainian surface-to-air missiles. Ukrainian forces have shot down at least 15 fixed-wing aircraft and at least 20 helicopters, according to a U.S. official. When Russian bombers do enter Ukrainian air space, they are mostly flying quick in-and-out missions, officials said. In ideal military strategy, a country would destroy another country's air-defense systems and then be able to fly freely through the air space. Russia has been unable to do that in Ukraine. As of Friday, Ukraine still had 80 percent of its air force intact - 56 warplanes - operating out of three bases in the country's west. Pentagon officials believed that recent strikes there aimed to render those airfields inoperative, but it was unclear how effective they had been. A senior Pentagon official said that as of Friday, Russians still had not targeted arms supply shipments coming into western Ukraine. There has been speculation that Russia may have been distracted by fighting in other parts of the country, but the stepped-up attacks in the west suggest that this may no longer be the case. There were also signs that Russia, staggered by sanctions, may be having trouble sustaining its war, and that is has asked China for military equipment and support, according to U.S. officials. "We are communicating directly, privately to Beijing that there will absolutely be consequences for large-scale sanctions evasion efforts or support to Russia to backfill them," Mr. XXX, the national security adviser, said on CNN on Sunday. Ukrainian and Russian officials said peace talks might resume Monday. "Russia is starting to talk constructively," said XXX, a Ukrainian presidential adviser and a member of Kyiv's delegation. "I think we will reach some concrete results, literally, in a few days." The Kremlin said it would not rule out the possibility of a meeting between President Putin and President Zelensky. "We would need to understand what the result of such a meeting would be and what would be discussed in it," XXX, the Kremlin's spokesman, told the Interfax news agency on Sunday. 